
---------- Page 1 ----------
DECEMBER 1990 - Part II
American
Caving
Accidents

---------- Page 2 ----------
This
page
intentially
left
blank

---------- Page 3 ----------
1990 American Caving Accidents
RAPPEL DEVICES - SOME OBSERVATIONS
1. Carabiner-Brake Bar
John Ganter sent me some reports last Spring describing
the failure of carabiner-brake bar devices in rappel situa-
tions. In the first (1), in a practice session, a kink in the rope
apparently caused the bar to shift off the gate opening; the
gate partly opened and bent sideways, reducing friction
greatly. In the second (2), a caver backed over an edge in
Hellhole on his stomach; the rappel device also scraped over
the edge and the gate partly opened. The bar then came off
and the rappeller was saved by his second 'biner-bar and a
bottom belay. The third (3) was in 147 foot Cemetary Pit and
again the gate got open, bent sideways, and the bar escaped.
The rest of the drop was safely negotiated on one 'biner-bar.
The two in-cave incidents happened in 1966 and 1967, while
the practice incident occurred in 1971.
A photo in the 1971 reference clearly shows a steel oval
biner with a solid aluminum brake bar. The other references
are old enough that steel biners may be involved. Steel
carabiners are a bad choice. The typical steel oval has a very
small overlap at the gate end and the stock from which it is
made is smaller than an aluminum oval and it thus mates
poorly with an aluminum brake bar. The resulting "slop" is
probably what allows the gate to open and bend sideways
when in use. Moreover, in a test result I saw some years ago,
of all biners then sold by REI, the steel oval was weakest,
testing at 1700-1800 lbs.
I believe these examples of carabiner-brake bar failure are
due to such carabiner-bar mismatches. One should never use
steel ovals, but many of today's aluminum ovals are unsuita-
ble as well, having bumps on the gate end of the body of the
biner. These bumps prevent the bar from sliding up and
securing the gate in use.
The tests done in the early 70's which concluded carabiner-
brake bars were safe for rappels (testing at around 1800 lbs)
used the standard aluminum oval (no bumps) and aluminum
brake bars. These have been used for decades with no
documented rappel fatalities. The device is thus a good one
for situations where lightness and small size are required.
The problem with this device is that you only have two
friction levels that can be applied - one biner/ bar or two.
December 1990
Volume 48
Number 12
Editor: Steve Knutson
Production: Mike Sims
The NSS NEWS (ISSN-0027-7010) is published monthly by the National Speleological Society Inc.,
Cave Ave., Huntsville, AL. 35810. Second-class postage paid at Huntsville, AL and additional offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to National Speleological Society Inc., Cave Ave,
Huntsville, AL. 35810.
Copyright c 1990 by the National Speleological Society, Inc.
Cover Photos c by Steve Knutson
Jeb Blakely placing a bolt, top of 140M drop Pozo de Sepalao, Guatemala.
"Rocki" Photo of a common occurrance in caving.
By Steve Knutson
2. The Rack
The rack is, in my opinion, the best rappel device there is.
Yet, there are potential problems. First, there are bars made
specifically for racks, with smaller holes than standard bars.
These bars will not slide around the curve of the rack and
thus must stay on the nut side. If the nut comes off, off go the
bars, and this actually has happened in caves (see ACA 88).
The rack is also easier to thread and unthread with bars on
the back side.
It is possible to thread a rack backwards (see 11-11A, this
issue) with potentially disasterous results. One would think
this just wouldn't happen, but, also, I once did it. It was on a
broad ledge at the top of a 150 foot drop; I rigged in and the
rope refused to looked down and discovered the error.
The new U-shape hollow steel bars look as if they would
eliminate this problem.
3. The Petzl Descender
I have no experience with this device. It is widely used by
Europeans, but this is with relatively short drops in the
European rebelay style. A new Australian device is similar to
the Petzl, but has a brake that activates whether you squeeze
or release it.
4. Figure-8
The figure-8 has no moving parts and is small and light,
but you have to detach it from yourself to rig and de-rig it. In
my opiinion this is a fatal flaw. In serious caving there are
many situations where if something is dropped, it is gone
forever. There is a figure-8 that doesn't have this flaw-the
CMI Rescue 8 (with ears). This has a third hole, in the waist
of the device, through which a biner can be inserted. This "8"
is left on the harness, a bight of the rope is passed through
the big hole and then through the biner. It is de-rigged by
unclipping it from the biner.
Someone pointed out that the problem of detachment loss
could be eliminated by having a carabiner attached to your
harness on the side, clipping the big end of the 8 to this, then
thread the rope, clip the small end to your main biner, unclip
from the side biner and descend. To de-rig, clip to the side
biner, unthread the rope, and carry the 8 clipped to the side
biner.
The ears on some 8's are for another potential problem-
the loops of rope getting all to the outer end of the 8, as could
happen when you take tension off it, to produce a knot.
The problems with an 8 are compounded if you are
rappelling into or rigging for descent from a swim.
5. Body Rappel
A few weeks ago I had occasion to want to do a belayed
climb in a cave when my vertical gear had been left at the
entrance pit. We had a bolt kit and a couple of biners. I did
the climb and definitely did not want to downclimb it. So I
put in a bolt, doubled the rope for pull down, and did a body
rappel,
The body rappel is looked on with disdain these days, but I
don't think you are a complete vertical caver if you don't
know how to do one. In an emergency it can be very useful.
And let's face it, it is much less complicated than any of the
others. Try it-you'll hate it, but it just might come in handy
sometime.
Conclusion:
Most problems with rappel devices seem to come from too
little friction, rigging wrong, or a poorly set up device. I make
it a habit of rigging in, then putting real stress on the anchor
in a direction that won't put me over the edge if something is
wrong. Even if the rope is rigged so it goes pretty much
straight down the drop, this can be done. If your device isn't
giving proper friction, you'll know it.
All these devices will do the job if you learn to use them
properly.

---------- Page 4 ----------
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS - 1989
This is the 1989 issue of the annual compendium of safety
incidents in North American caving. Considering that a few reports
are usually yet to arrive, the volume and distribution of incidents
seems to fit rather well with the past three years.
1. RESULT OF INCIDENT
Code - Result
AA Fatality (body evacuation)
A Injury (requiring aid or evacuation)
B Evacuation or other aid (no injury)
C Injury (no aid required)
D No injury or aid required
Total
Total AA, A, B, C
2. Cause of Incident
Code - Cause
a acetylene explosion
b bad air
C caver fall
d drowning
e equipment failure
f flood
h hypothermia
i illness
I losing the way
r rockfall
S stuck
t trapped
-not used-
X exhaustion


********** 0 other
3. SCUBA
1989 INCIDENT SUMMARY
The totals for 1989 are comparable in all categories to the previous
three years. There was only one fatality (7-23A) and this is certainly
an improvement.
There were three main causes of incidents, caver fall, equipment
failure and rock fall, followed closely by losing the way and being
trapped, though those two are usualy compounded by other causes,
especially equipment failure (spelled f-l-a-s-h-I-i-g-h-t).
Of caver falls there were the usual bunch where a hold broke
(3-11, 3-17, 8-6, 9-18C), the climber slipped (Spring A), was pulled
by a pack (3-5A) or fell from unknown causes (1-12, 5-16, Summer
H, 11-18A). These, of course, were unbelayed climbs. There was a
belayed fall (2-28) where the pitons pulled out but took enough of the
force of the fall to prevent serious injury. Other, less common causes,
were floor collapse (Summer G), collapse of an old wooden ladder
(3-25), climbing hand-over-hand when the rope broke (1-3), a partial
fall running from a flood (Fall), an actor in a video not being told
about a pit he would encounter (Sept A), a large group following in
line each stepping across a hole until finally someone is not paying
Dr
attention (8-26), a caver jerked off holds by someone testing the
AAi
handline (May C), an instructor helping ferry kids across an exposed
Do
slope with a handline, falling down the drop himself (11-11C), and a
Ae
caver who headed for the top of a rope, slipped and ended up
hanging by his foot over the drop (Summer A). Happily, none of
these were fatal.
Note that the March 28 incident in last years ACA actually
Atce
happened in 1989 and should have been in this issue.
Under equipment failure, we have the usual light failures (2-5,
332 NSS News December1990
3-24, 7-15, 9-8) and inability to climb a rope hand-over-hand (July).
In another example of the latter, the rope broke causing injury (1-3).
Another group was using a single set of Jumars and couldn't make it
(8-27). A Gibbs ascender had a worn cam and slipped (4-19), while
another failed to lock but the caver was saved from a heel hang by a
seat safety ((Summer D). Another wasn't SO well-equipped and
nearly died (May A). A rack was threaded wrong (11-11A), an old
wooden ladder collapsed (3-25), a bolt bent and stripped (9-28), a
glove caught in a figure-8 (9-18A) and a rope sheath wore, exposing
the core (9-5).
Rockfall incidents were the usual sort of someone climbing above
someone else (1-5, 1-14, March, 6-16, Summer E, September B)
and shifting boulders (2-11A, 3-4, 12-22) as well as the odd floor
collapse (4-29), dislodging a rock with a wheelbarrow (7-25) and a
cut lip from a pivoting rock in a crawlway (11-11B).
Losing the way was common with most due to light failure or poor
lights (2-5, 3-24, 9-8, 10-22, 11-12), but others resulted from bad
communication (7-23), and confusion (7-15, Summer B).
There were no really serious floods but several flood scares
(Winter, 8-30, 11-19, Fall). Flooding contributed to the only fatality in
1989 (7-23A), by drowning. There was another such incident, this
time a near-drowning (2-22).
Hypothermia cases are all potentially serious, but this year there
were no fatalities (Winter, 4-15, Summer F), though, again,
hypothermia contributed to the only fatality (7-23A).
Of course, there was the typical carbide dump in an ammo box
resulting in an acetylene explosion (12-29). Bad air created an
illness, a near fatality from metabolic alkalosis (6-4). There was only
one case of exhaustion (May B).
Cavers were trapped by inability to get past a rebelay (3-5B),
losing the way on a thru-trip (4-15), inability to climb hand-over-hand
(July), inability to Jumar (8-27), by flooding (8-30), having a rope
break (1-3), and by a boulder on the leg (12-22).
The Other category includes the really bizarre, the unusual: a wave
in a sea cave smashing one kayaker against another (Spring B); a
caver injured because he jumped into shallow water (Spring C); a
second degree carbide burn (8-1); kneecaps spontaneously dislocat-
ing (2-11B, 11-18B); and getting poked in the eye (11-23).
Note that I am using the analysis of those on the scene as much as
possible. Please address any criticisms, new comments, or
information on any new incident to:
American Caving Accidents
Steve Knutson, Editor
PO Box 572
Boring, OR 97009
This publication is only as good and complete as the reports
received allow it to be. This is your publication, cavers, please
contribute. I want to thank those who sent publications or
reports-this has definitely improved over the years.
It should be noted that these incidents are less than the real total.
This was demonstrated one evening last Summer when I sat down
with three of the more active West Coast cavers and learned of a
number of incidents that would have gone unreported otherwise.
INCIDENT CHRONOLOGY, 1989
Previously Unreported:
Sticky Wicket Cave
CA
10-87
Tongue River Cave
WY
2-20-88
Stephens Gap Pit
AL
5-15-88
Unspecified Pit
TN
Summer 88
1989 Incidents:
Unnamed Pit
TN
1-3
Di
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
1-5

---------- Page 5 ----------
Ac
Johnson Cave
TN
1-12
Dr
Onyx Cave
AZ
1-14
Bh
Practice Cave
CA
Winter
Ble
Airplane Cave
TN
2-5
Dr
Paxton's Cave
WV
2-11 A
Ao
Scott Hollow Cave
WV
2-11 B
Bd
Sistema Agua Blanca, Tab.
MEX
2-22
Dc
Sistema Agua Blanca, Tab.
MEX
2-28
Dr
Cueva Cheve, Oax.
MEX
3-4
Ac
Cueva Cheve, Oax.
MEX
3-5 A
Bt
Cueva Cheve, Oax.
MEX
3-5 B
Cc
Rimstone Falls Cave
WV
3-11
Ac
Cueva del Tecalote, Tam.
MEX
3-17
Ble
Anvil Cave
AL
3-24
Cce
McCart's Pit
IN
3-25
Ao
Unspecified Sea Cave
CA
Spring B
Ao
Correador Cave
Costa Rica
Spring C
Btlxh
Pine Hill Cave
KY
4-15
De
Cemetary Pit
GA
4-1
Cr
Climax Cave
GA
4-2
Ac
Saltpeter Cave
TN
5-16
Be
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
May A
Bx
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
May B
Cc
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
May C
Do
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
May D
Cbi
Dragon's Breath Cave
CA
6-4
Ar
Mammoth Cave
KY
6-16
Be
Greenhorn Cave
CA
Summer A
Dicx
Greenhorn Cave
CA
Summer B
Bt
Hoaches Cave
OH
Summer C
De
Bigfoot Cave
CA
Summer D
Dr
Bigfoot Cave
CA
Summer E
Bh
Unspecified Cave
CA
Summer F
Dc
Unspecified Cave
CA
Summer G
Dc
Un-named Cave
CA
Summer H
Bte
Unspecified Cave
TN
July
Bel
Rehoboth Church Cave
WV
7-15
AAdhf
My Cave
WV
7-23 A
BI
Tumbling Rock Cave
AL
7-23 B
Cr
Great Onyx Cave
KY
7-25
Co
Sinking Cove Cave
TN
8-1
Ac
Doghill-Donnehue Cave
IN
8-6
Ac
Sharer's Cave
PA
8-26
Ate
Ludington's Cave
WV
8-27
Bft
Snail Cave
AL
8-30
Dc
Bigfoot Cave
CA
Sept A
Dr
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
Sept B
De
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
9-5
Ble
Cave near Bowling Green
KY
9-8
De
Nielson's Well
UT
9-18 A
Bs
Nielson's Well
UT
9-18 B
Cc
Nielson's Well
UT
9-28 A
De
Nielson's Well
UT
9-28 B
Da
Ashmore Spring Cave
AL
10-21
BI
Wind Cave
SD
10-22
Def
Falling Springs Cave
AL
Fall
Ce
Ellison's Cave
GA
11-11 A
Cr
Ashmore Spring Cave
AL
11-11 B
Ac
Crooked Creek Ice Cave
KY
11-11 C
BI
Cueva del Diablo
MEX
11-12
Ac
Clark's Cave
VA
11-18 A
Ao
Ellison's Cave
GA
11-18 B
Df
Onesquathaw Cave
NY
11-19
Co
Cueva Cuchillo
MEX
11-23
Art
Cave near Austin
TX
12-22
Bi
Sotano de Cepillo
MEX
12-29
Diving:
AAd
Blue Grotto
FL
1-29
AAd
Morrison Spring
FL
3-4
Do
Gilmore Springs
AL
3-18
AAd
Vortex Springs
FL
3-19
AAd
Cenote Bolom Chojol,Yucatan
MEX
9-10
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED INCIDENTS
Dr Sticky Wicket Cave, California
October 1987
In Sticky Wicket Cave near Santa Cruz, California, a caver was
exploring solo, at night. He was wearing a wetsuit; at one point he
entered a wet crawlway, feet first. He bumped against a granite
cobble wedged in the ceiling, but got past it. However, when he
wiggled it, the side and ceiling collapsed in a shower of decomposed
granite sand and cobbles plus a 75 pound limestone rock. The caver
let everything settle for a few minutes, then dug out the debris on top
of the 75 pound slab and crawled by without further incident.
Reference: Dan Clardy Personal Communication June 1990.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
AAI - Tongue River Cave, Wyoming
2-20-88
At about noon on Saturday, February 20, Mike Hogue (25), his
wife, and at least one other companion entered Tongue River Cave
in the Bighorn Mountains near Sheridan, Wyoming.
Hogue had recently had surgery and still had a tube for medication
in his chest. He weighed well over 200 pounds, but was "apparently
in good physical condition." They proceeded to the "Rain Room" and
at some point Hogue suffered a seizure and collapsed. Companions
went for help and the Sheridan County Sheriff's Office dispatched
ambulance and rescue teams. Rescuers soon located Hogue but
extensive resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful, and he was
pronounced dead at 5:40 p.m. He was then placed in a litter and
transported from the cave.
References:
1) Scott Stackpole "Story man dies in Tongue River Cave... The
Sheridan Press Feb. 22, 1988, p.1.
2) Bob Montgomery Personal Communication Jan. 15, 1990.
Analysis: There was reportedly the use of cocaine involved in this
fatality.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Do - Stephen's Gap Pit, Alabama
5-15-88
On Sunday, May 15, 1988, four cavers visited Stephen's Gap Pit in
Alabama. There were "several large, dead, precariously perched
trees or logs in the entrance area." They rigged the highest drop
possible (160 to 165 feet) and Mark Jancin (33) started down as a
large second group of cavers and bystanders arrived. Jancin
reached the bottom and got off rope and out of the rockfall zone. For
the next 5 to 10 minutes "many small rocks" were heard hitting the
bottom of the drop; this apparently was brought under control above,
so Rod Willard (27) started down. He was inexperienced in long
drops, so Jancin bottom-belayed him, keeping within 2 to 3 feet of a
protective alcove.
When Willard was about one-third of the way down, Jancin glanced
up and saw a "sprawling, dendritic shadow" falling past Willard-he
jumped for the alcove and at the same time put tension on the rope.
A second later, a 25 foot section of tree hit the bottom, the tip within 5
to 6 feet of Jancin. Its maximum limb size was 6 to 8 inches in
diameter. Willard was not hit and continued down. The rest of the pit
trip was completed without further incident. Witnesses reported that
the tree-fall was spontaneous-not human-caused.
Reference: Mark Jancin "Incident Report' 5-19-89, unpub. 1 p.

---------- Page 6 ----------
Ae - Unspecified Pit, Tennessee
Summer 1988
It is reported that at least one person of a caving group was unable
to get out of a 50 foot pit in east Tennessee. The authorities were
called and the local Rescue Squad responded. An EMT descended
and checked the victim. Rescuers then pulled him up using a manila
rope. About 25 or 30 feet up, the rope broke. The victim fell back to
the bottom, breaking a leg and the arm of the EMT, who was
standing below him. (Jeff Cooper Personal Communication July 11,
1989).
1989 INCIDENT REPORTS
Atce caver fall - Unnamed Pit, Tennessee
1-3-89
On Tuesday, January 3, six teenagers visited a cave on Whiteoak
Mountain near Ooltewah, Tennessee. They entered in the afternoon,
using a rope as a handline to aid the descent of the pit entrance.
Three had difficulty climbing out, so they had the last three hold the
rope while they were pulled out, as a group, by the others. They got
part way up when the rope broke. Chad Hardin (14) and Shawn
Aikens (15) landed on a ledge, but Justin Hulsey (13) fell 30 feet to
the bottom, breaking a leg.
Help was summoned and police called the cliff/pit/cave rescue
team of the Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue Service, as well
as paramedics and a fire department. A rope was rigged and a
rescuer descended to the ledge while a haul system was rigged. The
two on the ledge were hauled up while Hulsey's leg was splinted.
Hulsey was then hauled up. A helicopter was available, but was not
needed.
References:
1) Beth Elliott, NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pp.
2) Ed. "Ooltewah teen is injured in cave accident" The
Chattanooga Times Jan. 4, 1989, p B1, 4.
Dr rockfall - Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
1-5-89
On Thursday, January 5, four cavers were doing the first ascent of
Apricot Dome, near Apricot Pit in Lechuguilla Cave, Eddy County,
New Mexico. At a "70 degree, ascending, ramplike passage," two
cavers remained at the bottom while Mark Champagne free-climbed,
ascending some 60 feet while traversing about 100 feet. This got him
to a room and boulder choke at the foot of a 90 degree pitch.
Some rocks were apparently dislodged and a warning shout was
made. Kent Wilson (29) was one of the two at the bottom of the
chute. He dove for an alcove 5 feet to the left, but was struck a
glancing blow on the right side of his polyethylene, construction-type
hard hat. The impact knocked him down and his carbide lamp went
flying as did his eyeglasses, even though they were secured with an
elastic "Croakies" strap. The helmet was not damaged and Wilson
seemed to be alright, so they continued. The only result was a stiff
neck that lasted several months.
Reference: Kent Wilson NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pp.
Analysis: It may be that those at the bottom should have been in the
alcove already - let's face it, "Rock!" happens.
Ac caver fall - Johnson Cave, Tennessee
1-12-89
On January 12, a caver was exploring solo in Johnson Cave in
Tennessee. In the "Hall of the Mountain King" he fell and suffered a
broken leg. Apparently he had left word of what he was up to, for a
search and rescue soon occurred. The victim was found "sitting up
334 NSS News December 1990
against a rock and having a bite to eat, by the light of his carbide
lamp (... on its last charge)."
Reference: Ed. "Editorial Remarks" Speleonews Feb. 1989, p 3.
*
Dr rockfall - Onyx Cave, Arizona
1-14-89
On January 14, a group of cavers was executing the last portion of
an Escabrosa Grotto training program - a descent and ascent of
165 foot Hell Hole in Onyx Cave, Arizona. They entered at 8 a.m.
and proceeded several hundred feet to the pit. This contained an
offset halfway down and a very tight place below that called the
"Selector Window." The leader descended to the offset and
re-rigged the rope for the last portion of the drop as the others
descended. It was discovered that a main-rigging carabiner had
been left unlocked at the top, but this was corrected.
The leader descended to the Selector Window, but could not fit
through. He chose to remain there and the others completed the
descent. Another unlocked 'biner was "corrected" at the landing. The
leader was exposed to rockfall, but nothing large enough to cause
injury came down. The rope apparently was just barely long enough.
Reference: Marion Vittetoe Personal Communication 12-14-89;
Terry Sweet Personal Communications 11-15, 12-15-89.
Analysis: This is not much of an incident, but deserves some
comment. First, it is hard to see the point of deliberately exposing
oneself to rockfall, especially in a training exercise where one should
be teaching safe caving. Rockfall is a leading cause of cave
accidents. Second, the really unsafe practice here seems to be
caving where the participants are not getting along; personality
conflicts and attitude problems which were reportedly present are
anathema to safe caving. In a situation where such obviously exists,
all participants are guilty. Call it off.
Regarding the unlocked locking 'biners, most pit rigging is probably
done with non-locking 'biners which are more than adequate for the
job. So if the 'biners aren't locked, don't panic. If the rigging is in
flowing water, or where a flood might reach it, use locking 'biners and
lock them.
*
Bh hypothermia - Practice Cave, California
Winter 1989
A group of cavers spent a long time exploring in Practice Cave,
near Santa Cruz, California. By the time they had exited, one caver
had slipped into hypothermia, but this was not noticed by the others.
They walked back in the rain to one caver's house, doing a 900 foot
elevation gain. There, the hypothermia was discovered when the
affected caver proved more incoherent than usual. He was put in a
hot shower and soon recovered. It should be remembered that a
hypothermia victim has essentially stopped producing body heat and
can actually continue to walk or whatever until he drops dead, having
used the last of his energy.
Reference: Bob Richardson Personal Communication June
1989.
Ble lost, poor lights - Airplane Cave, Tennessee
2-5-89
At about 4:30 p.m. on Sunday afternoon, February 5, four men
went exploring in Airplane Cave, a well-known cave in Tiftonia,
Tennessee. These were George Beason (21), Clayton Waller (22),
Manuel Watson (22) and Steve Brooks (22). Only one of them had
been in the cave before. They were without hard hats, and had only
one flashlight each. After eight hours, they were trying to get to the
"Clay Room" when they realized they were lost. They attempted to
follow arrows on the wall, but these were inconsistent. Two flashlights

---------- Page 7 ----------
were lost when they were dropped down inaccessible cracks. Finally,
three decided to stay where they were while one, Manuel Watson,
continued to search for the way out; it was around midnight.
Friends or relatives notified the Hamilton County Rescue Squad
around 7:30 a.m. Their cave team proceeded to the cave and
encountered Watson at 8:30 as he exited. Fifteen minutes after
entering, the rescue team heard the lost crew yelling for help; they
found them in a dry area of belly-crawl maze-like passages. They
were cold, hungry and thirsty, but uninjured. They had been in the
cave for 16 hours.
References:
1) Kenny Sloan "4 Cavers Lost for 16 Hours" Chattanooga
News-Free Press Feb. 6, 1989, p 1,2.
2) Ed. "4 Men are found after 16 hours in Tiftonia's Airplane Cave"
The Chattanooga Times Feb. 7, 1989.
3) Beth Elliott NSS Accident Report undated, 3 pp.
Analysis: After the lost cavers were heard yelling, they had to be
located in the 3-D maze. This occurred when a rescuer started down
a tube and "smelled a strong odor of alcohol." They admitted to "only
having 4 to 5 beers each" before entering the cave but at least they
got their pictures in the papers.
Apparently lost-caver rescues occur several times a year at
Airplane Cave.
Dr rockfall - Paxton's Cave, Virginia
2-11-89
"On Saturday, February 11, 1989, a group of twelve cavers from
Frederick Grotto were on a sport trip through Paxton's Cave in
Virginia. Two cavers had visited the cave previously. Conditions were
just a bit wetter than the previous trip three months before. All
members were experienced cavers."
"Tom Lupp (33) was leading the group as they headed for the main
formation room. Approximately one hour into the trip the group was
looking for the proper route in a breakdown area. Lupp climbed on a
large rock slab, about 5 by 5 feet, to tie his boot lace. He sat there
and talked to a companion for a minute when the rock suddenly
began to slide. It moved about five feet and came to rest against
another rock, with Lupp ending up between the two rocks. His only
injury was a bruised left forearm."
"Approximately one-half hour later, Tim Folmar (22) was climbing
over some wedged chockstones. Most of the group had already
climbed over, and as Tim pulled himself up, the rock fell down about
3 feet. He jumped to another chockstone only to have it fall away. He
finally landed on a solid rock. Due to the presence of marks in the
mud, it was obvious that the rock had been climbed over many times.
Three and one-half hours into the trip, several members went
through the gate which is near the back of the cave. Peggy Hurley
(21) and Jeff Brandenburg (23) were standing near a wall. Hurley
leaned against the wall and a rock slab came loose, falling to the
floor near her heel and almost hitting Brandenburg's foot."
"The group exited the cave without further incident."
Reference: Thomas Lupp NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pp.
Analysis: Lupp had heard no reports of loose rocks in this cave
before. Furthermore, there were no signs of unusual weather or
temperature conditions.
Ao other, knee dislocated - Scott Hollow Cave, WV
2-11-89
On Saturday, February 11, a group of cavers entered Scott Hollow
Cave, Monroe County, West Virginia, on a biology/hydrology
scientific trip. About 1000 to 1500 feet into the cave, the group was
walking down the main passage when Bill Jones' (40) kneecap
suddenly popped out of joint. A paramedic was in the group but the
dislocated kneecap, a very painful condition, refused to yield. The
victim attempted to walk but could not. Assistance was requested
and Jones was evacuated on a Stokes litter. It was six weeks before
he could put weight on the injured leg.
Reference: George Dasher "Rockin' Chair" The West Virginia
Caver 7(2), April 1989, p 8.
Analysis: One of the rescuers left Jones at the hospital, went home,
changed clothes, and proceeded to a pizza place; the victim was
already there, eating pizza!
Bd near drowning - Sistema Agua Blanca, Tab., Mexico 2-22-89
On February 22, three cavers were surveying in Sistema Blanca in
the State of Tabasco, Mexico. These were Warren Netherton, Jim
Pisarowicz and David Dayer. This was apparently a pick-up crew,
since Dayer could speak only French but they could communicate
since Pisarowicz managed "some broken French." They managed
the survey with Dayer holding the "dumb" end of the tape.
They mapped down a slope in a huge passage to the edge of a
lake. Dayer could not swim, and on previous trips he had passed
such water obstacles on a fixed line by pulling himself along.
Pisarowicz swam ahead and found the lake to be over 100 meters
long and nearly all swimming depth. Along one margin, however,
were sufficient holds that one could pull oneself along, except for two
25 meter sections. Dayer crossed using a fixed line as before.
In the extremely muddy passage beyond, Dayer's Petzl carbide
lamp and generator became so mud-packed that it ceased to
function and he was left with only his Petzl electric. By the time they
returned to the lake the electric had also stopped working. Netherton
gave Dayer a spare mini-maglite and this was attached to Dayer's
helmet. Netherton then swam across the lake towing everyone's
packs.
Dayer headed back across the lake, with Pisarowicz swimming
alongside. About ten meters out, Dayer began "flailing around.
Pisarowicz tried talking to calm him down but he panicked, let go of
the rope and "sank like a rock."
Pisarowicz swam to that point and dove underwater, where he
managed to get hold of the collar of Dayer's coveralls. He pulled
Dayer up to the surface where he was able, though "coughing and
retching," to grasp the rope again. The only light now was the
mini-maglite on Dayer's helmet, and Netherton's light at the other
side of the lake. Pisarowicz then got Dayer back to shore.
Dayer soon "regained his composure" so Pisarowicz swam the
lake and got an electric lamp, fixing it to his helmet. He conferred
with Netherton and it was decided to re-rig the rope so that the
attachment point at the far (Dayer's) end would be high, keeping
Dayer well out of the water for half the distance across.
Once the rope was re-rigged, Dayer indicated he knew what to do
and they again started across. About halfway, he again began to
panic; Pisarowicz grabbed Dayer's collar and towed him the rest of
the way.
Reference: Jim Pisarowicz "Cave Incident Report," unpublished,
undated, 3 pp.
Analysis: Pisarowicz feels that "this entire incident would not have
happened if all cavers would learn to swim." If you do not swim, carry
some sort of personal flotation device with you.
There were several factors that contributed to the problem. Dayer
had only two light sources, Pisarowicz had only one helmet light
source, no one had a flotation aid, and cavers in the party did not
speak the same language. Of course, the overriding factor is that
Dayer couldn't swim and thus had no business continuing into the
swim environment. Even swimmers drown-Dayer should not have
been allowed to continue. Lucky for him Pisarowicz is a former
lifeguard.

---------- Page 8 ----------
Dc caver fall, aid climb - Sistema Agua Blanca,
overflows before the East Gorge.
Tabasco, Mexico
2-28-89
In a large, breakdown-floored hall a short way from the drop to East
On Tuesday, February 28, Warren Netherton and Jim Pisarowicz
Gorge they encountered Don Coons, who had returned to see how
(37) entered Sistema Agua Blanca in Tabasco, Mexico to do an aid
they were doing. After he left, Farr, the only one of the three who had
climb. Two days before they had found an important lead and had
been to camp, could not find the way. After scouting around for
surveyed to a vertical flowstone cascade with a continuation at the
several minutes, he announced to the other two that he had found a
top.
way.
Pisarowicz was the more experienced climber and so started up,
placing pitons in the crack between flowstone and bedrock. He got
climbdown in breakdown, and into a hands and knees crawl. Ahead,
up about 5 meters with two pitons and put in a third, commenting
Knutson could see Farr disappearing into a turn, dragging his pack
about how solid it sounded. He placed a fourth pin, attached an etrier
behind him. At the turn, the crawl downsloped, then leveled out as far
and stepped on it, reaching up to place a fifth piton. At this point, the
ahead as one could see, a belly crawl with the pack on. Knutson left
fourth "popped without warning," as did each piton in line after each
the pack on and slid down the smooth floor one body-length.
took some of the load. He fell 6 meters, hit the steep slope at the
Unfortunately, the pack rode up over his left shoulder and was now
bottom and rolled down it, uninjured.
upside-down, bottom against the ceiling and top on the floor.
Reference: Jim Pisarowicz "Cave Incident Report" unpublished,
Knutson was stable, feet hooked into a depression, but could not see
undated, 2 pp.
anything, his face being pinned against the floor. His immediate
Analysis: The protection "unzipped" but did its job, slowing the fall.
worry was that he could not see where the pack would go if he
In doing aid climbs with chocks or pitons, the best thing to do is place
pushed forward, allowing it to continue on over-he was still attached
an occasional bolt for security. Beware of flowstone.
to it by the shoulder straps.
Farr was apparently a short distance away and replied that he
couldn't come over. Knutson asked if anything would happen if he
Dr rockfall, trapped foot - Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
3-4-89
released the pack and received an indication to go ahead.
On the Spring expedition to Cueva Cheve in Oaxaca, Mexico,
the ceiling, toppling directly into a pit-Knutson, still in the shoulder
Peter Quick was on his way to camp in the cave for a ten day stay. In
straps, went after it. The pit was only a few meters deep, but his side
the Giant's Staircase, a huge descending, boulder-floored passage,
a large rock rotated as he stepped on it, pinning his foot. The rock
was too heavy to move in his awkward position and he was alone.
He was able to untie the boot and slip his foot out. It was then
possible to roll the boulder over and retrieve the boot.
Reference: Peter Quick "Proyecto Papalo Trip Report" DUG
Scoops April 1989, Pg. 3.
flat area that would serve as a bivouac site. The victim was obviously
Ac caver fall - Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
3-5-89
Early in March a group of cavers assembled at Llano Cheve, at
2700 meters elevation in the State of Oaxaca, Mexico. The
expedition planned to push Cueva Cheve, already 1100 meters
deep, from a camp at -900 m, some 6 km into the cave. The first
ten-day camp would include Jim Smith, Don Coons, Bill Farr, Carol
Veseley, Peter Bosted, Steve Knutson, and Peter Quick.
The route to camp consisted of essentially dry passage with
numerous short to medium drops down to Saknussem's Well, a 120
m drop with several re-belays to keep one out of a now-augmented,
entrance-stream cascade. At the bottom the stream was followed,
easy at first, then through a series of short falls and grind holes (the
Turbines) with complex bypass rigging, to easier stream work. The
route then took a dry overflow bypass through spacious passage to
the drop into the East Gorge, a river passage that leads down a
major waterfall drop, to the climb to camp in a dry, sandy-floored
overflow. The cave is cold, with temperatures varying from 47 in the
upper part to the low 50's at camp.
At about noon on Saturday, Farr, Veseley, Quick, Bosted, Coons
and Knutson entered. Some camp gear had already been stashed at
the top of Saknussem's Well. The cave was rigged European style,
with numerous re-belays. Packs were on the order of 50 pounds.
Later, Jim Smith and Bill Stone entered, Smith to head for camp and
Stone to ferry in some rope.
After 11 hours, the crew was all past Saknussem's Well and the
Turbines. At this point the faster ones continued on to camp, another
5 hours; Knutson, whose pack had leaked and become wet and
much heavier, and Veseley, who was getting tired, were now going
slowly. Farr stayed to shepherd them to a bivouac at the dry
336 NSS News December 1990
The next morning, Sunday, March 5, they continued toward camp.
With packs on, Knutson and Veseley followed Farr to a three meter
At this point Knutson called to Farr, saying that he was in trouble.
Releasing his feet, Knutson nudged forward and the pack cleared
struck a projection. After he hit the bottom, the first breath he took
produced a grating of broken ribs on his lower right side.
Veseley quickly came up and learned of the injury. There was little
pain so the victim got out of his pack straps, chimneyed out of the
hole, re-negotiated the crawlway and climbed back into the spacious
room where they had lost the way. As he sat down to rest,
excruciating pain set in and there was no position he could assume
that was comfortable. Coons returned and the victim was walked to a
mobile but at -800 m plus and 5 to 6 km from the entrance, he would
have to recuperate if he was to make it out under his own power. A
bivouac was set up while Farr went to camp to alert the cavers there;
he returned and, with Veseley, spent Sunday night with the victim
while Coons returned to camp.
On Monday morning Knutson felt much better; Smith arrived at the
bivouac, examined the injury, and at 11 am headed for the surface.
They had devised a plan as follows: Knutson would self-rescue in
three stages, with two more bivouacs, one on the rough ledge-
bypass above the Fuel Injector (the worst of the Turbines), and the
other at the old Camp I, above Saknussem's Well. One caver would
accompany Knutson to physically help him at difficult places and
several others would carry the bivouac gear. Peter Bosted
volunteered to stay with the victim at the bivouacs. The camp cavers
would execute the first move, and surface cavers would manage the
other two. Meanwhile, a doctor would be sought from the United
States and rescue teams there wwould be put on stand-by in case
Knutson couldn't make it out on his own. The big fear was that
another fall or climbing move might puncture a lung, turning the
self-rescue into a body retrieval.
At 1 pm, Knutson, escorted by Coons, headed for the Turbine
bivouac. This move traversed relatively easy stream passage with
only a 20 meter rope pitch at the end, up to the bivouac ledge.
Knutson made this OK, moving steadily-he found that if the body
was held rigidly upright, pain was minimal. Since the injury, only low
order pain killers were administered: Ibuprofen and/or acetomino-
phen with codeine. If the victim was too drugged, it would increase
the danger of a fall on a move and complicate matters. He arrived at
the bivouac site at 5 pm. At 7 pm the sleeping bag and air mattress
arrived and Knutson, now very cold, was helped into it. At 8 pm
Coons and the others headed for camp and Bosted was left with the

---------- Page 9 ----------
victim. Knutson had gone to bed with a Farmer-John wetsuit on since
he was too cold to take it off. He was also wearing a Quallofil jacket
inside his sleeping bag. The victim shivered almost constantly until
about 4 am, when he finally warmed up. Bosted then helped him out
of the wetsuit. Wearing wet thinsulate thermal bottoms, the victim
took pain killers and finally got to sleep.
Jim Smith arrived on the surface at about 4 pm Monday and
organized the plan. Jeb Blakely and Bob Benedict had arrived and
headed for Huautla, a 20 hour round trip drive, to get a rescue litter.
Bill Stone drove out and called the U.S., putting rescuers there on
stand-by and reaching Dr. Noel Sloan, a caver doctor, who dropped
everything and flew down with equipment to save a lung-punctured
victim.
On Tuesday morning at 11 am, Bosted made breakfast and
Knutson felt better, walking the seven meters to the stove site. At 3
pm Smith, Bill Stone, Ron Simmons, and Bob Benedict entered,
bringing several short ropes, a bolt kit and pulleys. It was time for the
move up the Turbines and Saknussem's Well, and there was doubt
that the victim could make it. They arrived at the bivouac at 7 pm.
At 8 pm, Knutson headed up, wearing full wetsuit and regular
Mitchell climbing rig, escorted by Smith. A shoulder Gibbs was
brought, but the broken ribs were low on the right side and Knutson's
Alpine chest box harness produced no extraordinary pain. He
reached the next bivouac at 1 am and got into dry clothes and
sleeping bag. Bosted fixed a meal and they turned in at 3:30 am.
At 11 am on Wednesday, Bosted fixed soup and headed for the
surface to delay the next crew and get more drugs. He returned by
7:30 pm. That night the sleeping bag had actually dried out and the
victim got too hot, waking up and pulling down the bag. At 5 am, the
victim was awakened by Bosted who was just checking to see if he
was still alive-for the first time the victim's breathing was unlabored
and could not be heard.
Thursday morning saw Mark Minton, Rolf Adams and Noel Sloan
arrive at the bivouac. Sloan examined the injury, re-taped the ribs
and pronounced the victim fit. They headed for the surface (450
vertical meters, but dry) at 1 pm and arrived about 4 pm. The
self-rescue had taken a full four days.
References:
1) Peter Quick "Proyecto Papalo Trip Report" DUG Scoops April
1989, p 3-6.
2) Peter Bosted "Rescue from -850 Meters in a Mexican Cave"
Part 2, SFBC Newsletter May 1989.
3)Peter Bosted Personal Communication 4-1-89.
4) Steve Knutson Personal Communication 7-28-90.
5) Don Coons "Cheve 89 - Accident Report" unpublished, 4-15-89,
6 pp.
Analysis: Several things apparently contributed to the accident.
Knutson's pack was not totally waterproof and his sleeping bag and
extra clothing gradually picked up water and the pack became
heavier and harder to handle. This may be why he did not follow
Farr's example and drag the pack through the crawl after him.
Several participants suggested that no one go to an underground
camp without knowing the way; familiarization trips should be a
prelude to going for a camp stay. If the group had not been lost, they
would not have been in the crawlway in the first place.
Whatever he was doing at the time, Farr should not have ignored
the request for help; the victim could have been told to stay where he
was until Farr could see what he was talking about.
Regarding the rescue, the failure of the bivouac gear to reach the
first bivouac ahead of the victim seems the most serious problem.
The air mattress was very beneficial, allowing comfort and rest on the
very uneven surface at the first bivouac.
A victim of an accident is fortunate indeed to be caving with such a
capable crew and to get response like Noel Sloan's arrival at the
cave in southern Mexico only 30 hours after he was called in Indiana
and asked to help and they say doctors won't make house calls!
Bo trapped, rebelay - Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
3-5-89 B
On Saturday, March 5, a crew headed into Cueva Cheve for a
ten-day camp. At Saknussem's Well, Carol Veseley rappelled to a
rebelay and switched over to the line continuing down, but couldn't
unclip the last Jumar from the upper line-the loop one is supposed
to stand in to give slack was too short. Peter Bosted Jumared down
after 15 to 20 minutes and unclipped the Jumar while Veseley used
both hands to take her weight off it.
Later, at the Fuel Injector bypass, Veseley rappelled to the bottom
but failed to keep her pack, tethered below her, from hanging on
projections. Eventually, Peter Quick was forced to climb up and free
the pack.
A re-directional, consisting of a chock in a rotten-rock crack, pulled
out twice, leaving the rope it was directing hanging in a waterfall.
Clearly, a bolt was in order.
References:
1) Peter Bosted Personal Communication 4-1-89.
2)Steve Knutson Personal Communication 7-28-90.
*
*
Cc caver fall, ledge broke - Rimstone Falls Cave,
West Virginia
3-11-89
On March 11, George Dasher (36) was part of a group surveying in
Rimstone Falls Cave, Greenbrier County, West Virginia. It had been
a long day and they finally decided to end the survey. Dasher did a
flowstone climb and went on to see if the lead continued. In so doing,
he traversed a hole in the floor on a ledge, only to have the ledge
break, dropping him six feet to another ledge; the fall could have
been greater. He landed on his left knee, resulting in a bad bruise
and a cut with some bleeding. Dasher acknowledges that he was
mentally tired and should have paid more attention to what he was
doing.
Reference: George Dasher Personal Communication3-30-88
*
*
Ac caver fall, handhold broke - Cueva del Tecolote,
Tamaulipas, Mexico
3-17-89
In March a group of 14 cavers was camped inside Tecolote Cave
near Victoria in Tamaulipas State, Mexico. The camp was about
1700 meters horizontally and 200 meters below the entrance.
On the third day, Peter Sprouse was working with Dave Bunnell
and Ramon Espinasa. At about 9:30 p.m. they had finished mapping
leads off the bottom of the Fantasia Abyss, a wide, free-climbable
chasm in the Fantasia Borehole, extending south from camp.
Espinasa completed the climb, with Sprouse behind him. Sprouse
traversed three meters to a vertical step of 1.5 meters. He grabbed a
handhold and tried to haul himself up, but it broke. He fell backwards
5 to 7 meters, "bouncing at least once," breaking the fall with his left
hand once, landing on his rear and "coming to rest flat on his back."
Bunnell came to Sprouse, but Espinasa stayed up, not wanting to
risk rockfall. Sprouse had injured a lower left rib and his left arm-the
hand was already swollen and cocked at a funny angle. After 20
minutes he was able to stand without dizziness, so they fashioned a
sling for the left arm and proceeded back to camp, aiding Sprouse at
each climb. There he took Ibuprofen and got a night's sleep.
Early the next morning Sprouse headed out of the cave
accompanied by several cavers and reached the entrance in four
and a half hours, having negotiated "5 rope drops and various
climbs." He had suffered a broken radius and a cracked or bruised
rib.
Reference: Peter Sprouse "Accident Report" The Texas Caver
April 1989, p 34.
Analysis: Sprouse feels that his accident "was largely unprevent-

---------- Page 10 ----------
able, in that it was no more risky than a hundred other routine moves
done on an expedition such as this. The climb I was on was easy,
and I would do it again unbelayed without a second thought. My
mistake was in misjudging a handhold that I thought was strong
enough, but which failed."
Ble lost, poor lights - Anvil Cave, Alabama
3-24-89
At about 8 p.m. on Friday, March 24, four teenagers, Mike Haskins
(19), Adam Landman (18), Allison Wilson (17), and Michelle Rogers
(17), entered Anvil Cave, Morgan County, Alabama. They were
equipped with three hand lights and no map, and Anvil is a maze
cave. After a while they became lost; one light was dropped down a
crack and the other two grew dim. They sat down to wait.
Eventually, the kids' parents called the Sheriff's Office and they
called the Cave Rescue Unit Chief who called cavers.
A party of four searchers entered the cave at 2 a.m. Saturday and
did a sweep, calling out, along the standard route to Entrance 1. A
second team was put on standby. It looked like an extended, sector
by sector, search would be necessary. They then entered Sink 7 and
headed into Main Street where there was an answer to their calls.
The four were found "in a passage about 3 rows north of Main
Street, about 3 intersections east of Station 70." They were led out at
3 a.m.
Reference: Bill Varnadoe "Anvil Cave Rescue" Huntsville Grotto
Newsletter, 31(4) May-June 1989, p 29.
*
Cce caver fall, broken ladder - McCart's Pit Cave, Indiana 3-25-89
On Saturday, March 25, four cavers-Charles Bugh (20), Toby
King, Trent King, and Anmar Mirza-entered McCart's Pit near
Bloomington, Indiana. They were all experienced vertical cavers.
They rigged the climbable entrance slope, just to be safe, and
descended that and the following 12 foot drop which had an old
wooden ladder, one person at a time. Bugh was taking photos and
went last. At about 2 p.m., with the cameras in an ammo box, he
proceeded down the slope using the rope as a handline; he inquired
if everyone had actually used the ladder and was told that they had.
When he stepped on it, however, there was a loud "crack!" and he
was falling, breaking each rung in turn as he hit it. Apparently there
was considerable slack in the rope.
He was stopped momentarily about two feet from the bottom when
his camera box caught on a projection, swung up and hit him in the
mouth. He then landed on his feet at the bottom of the drop. His lip
was cut and part of a front tooth was missing, but he was otherwise
OK. The rope prevented his continuing down a 60 foot slope of
jagged breakdown. Bugh feels he should have just rappelled down.
Reference: Charles Bugh NSS Accident Report 5 pp, undated.
Cr rockfall - Osto de Puente Natural, Oaxaca, Mexico March 1989
Mark Minton was reportedly injured when struck in the face by
shrapnel from a falling rock when he was below someone climbing in
Osto de Puente Natural, a cave now connected to Cueva Cheve, in
Oaxaca State, Mexico. (Dale Pate, "Mexico News" The Texas Caver
April 1989, p 33.
Ao other - hit by wave - Unspecified Sea Cave, CA Spring 1989 B
Early in 1989 a married couple was kayaking off the California
338 NSS News December 1990
coast. They paddled into a sea cave in apparently calm seas and
were "surprised by a freak three-foot wave." The wife smashed
against her husband's kayak, suffering a broken jaw and uncon-
sciousness. The man grabbed her and paddled to safety. The
recommendation was that motocross chest/shoulder pads, knee and
elbow pads, as well as helmets be worn, and that cave kayakers be
experienced in surf, rolling and paddling, and be strong swimmers. It
should also be noted that there really is no such thing as a freak
wave. Ocean waves are initiated far away by a variety of causes and
the occasional larger wave should be expected.
Reference: Bill Klimack "In the Media" NSS News July 1990.
*
*
*
Ao other - jumped into shallow water - Correador Cave,
Costa Rica
Spring 1989 C
During part of the NSS Expedition to Costa Rica, cavers were
surveying and exploring in Correador Cave. One group took a
bypass passage to the main stream passage. When it rejoined the
main passage, there was a 7 foot drop to the water. A local caver,
"Carlos," who knew the cave demonstrated how to get down by
jumping-unfortunately, a recent hurricane flood had lessened the
water depth from three feet to one foot. Landing short, Carlos injured
a foot or ankle. This was examined and it was decided that a splint
and evacuation was necessary. A local was sent to camp to get help
and the injured man was assisted down the cave, hopping on one
foot, and down the river to the end of the road where a taxi was
waiting to take him to the local hospital.
Reference: Scott Fee "1989 Costa Rican Expedition, Chapter 4 'The
Rescue' CIG Newsletter May 1989, p 45-46.
*
Btlxh trapped, lost, exhausted - Pine Hill Cave, Kentucky 4-15-89
On Saturday morning, April 15, three boy scouts and three adult
advisors from Troop 75 of Bellbrook, Ohio, rappelled into a 125 foot
pit entrance to Pine Hill Cave in Rockcastle County, Kentucky. Other
members of the troop were to meet them by going in a different
entrance. Unfortunately the six in the pit could not find the small
crevice that led to the main body of the cave. Dave Trich, one of the
adults, tried to ascend the wet, drafty, 58 degree shaft but
hypothermia and hand cramps forced him to seek refuge on a ledge
partway up.
Scouts from the rest of the troop summoned help and got it from
the Sheriff's Office, fire departments and "professional spelunkers."
The cavers lowered Trich back down the shaft and gave the scouts
food and garbage bags to ward off hypothermia; the group was then
led out the other entrance.
References:
1) Amy Brooks Baber "Adventurous Cave Explorers Cause Quite a
Scare" Herald-Ledger (Lexington, KY) April 17, 1989, p B1.
2) Ryan DuBosar "Students Rescue Scouts from Cave" The
Student April 21, 1989, reprinted in Indiana Caver 1(2) Sept. 1989,
pp 18-19.
De equipment failure-slipping Gibbs - Cemetery Pit, Georgia4-19-89
On Wednesday, April 19, two cavers, Mark Jancin (34) and Dave
Clark were exploring in Cemetery Pit in Georgia. At around 4:30 p.m.
they were heading out. Jancin went first up the 155 foot entrance
drop. He had a ropewalker with chest box and a third Gibbs floating
just above the knee. The foot and knee Gibbs were 18 years old and
showed considerable shell and cam wear. About halfway up he
noticed the foot Gibbs start to slip. When his 235 pounds was on that

---------- Page 11 ----------
ascender alone, it would slip up to "6 to 8 inches per second." He
attached a seat connected Jumar above the upper Gibbs and
continued up using a combination of modified Texas and semi-
ropewalker.
Reference: Mark Jancin "Incident Report" 5-19, 5-30-89, un-
published, 2 pp.
Analysis: Jancin had used the same setup in a tree-supported
pulley-fed practice climb the day before, with no problem. Still, he
had the foresight to equip himself as he always did, with extra
ascending capability. He had seen wear on the 7th cam tooth before,
but after the climb there was new, though minor "polishing" on both
the 8th and 9th teeth. Beware-check ascenders for wear.
Cr rockfall, floor collapse - Climax Cave, Georgia
4-29-89
On Saturday, April 29, Mark Jancin (34) and Beth Alston were
exploring in Climax Cave in Georgia. They got out to the Lost Cord
Room in the northern part of the cave and then headed back for the
entrance. At "Da Lakes" they stopped and Jancin posed for a
picture, sitting on and straddling a large prong of bedrock "that
apparently connected with the surrounding floor and wall."
When Jancin stood up again, there was a loud crashing sound as
"the floor and adjacent rock mass collapsed downward." The
dimensions of collapse were about 7-10 ft by 3 ft by 6 ft; Jancin rode
the collapse downward with his legs getting "enmeshed in the
shifting, tumbling mass," but only for 8 feet laterally and 6 feet
vertically, as the mass came to rest in a pool. Jancin's toes were in
the water, but he was not trapped. He climbed back up slope and
they examined the damage. He had suffered a twisted left ankle, a
puncture wound and contusion to the inner, lower left shin, a scraped
right shin and a nasty-looking contusion to the back of the right knee.
He was able to move normally and so they left the cave. X-rays
showed no additional problems.
Reference: Mark Jancin "Accident Report" unpub., 5-19-89, 2 pp.
Analysis: In two years of exploration in Climax, Jancin reports
experiencing about a dozen examples of minor rock collapse. The
water table in the cave at the time of the incident was at a 20 year
low and it is possible that this exposed some instability. Jancin's
weight added little to the collapsing mass which might have collapsed
under its own weight. Nevertheless, one must always be suspicious
in a cave-nothing lasts forever.
Jancin's injuries could easily have been much worse, with crushed
legs and/or being trapped underwater. Constrictions between them
and the entrance would have made evacuation difficult.
*
*
Ac caver fall, slipped - Saltpeter Cave, Tennessee
5-16-89
On Tuesday morning, May 16, seven teenagers entered Saltpeter
Cave in Cumberland County, Tennessee. They proceeded to explore
and reached a point "two miles" into the cave. At 9:30 a.m. Charles
Ferrerio (17), an exchange student from Spain, "lost his footing on
muddy rocks and fell 20 feet," landing on his back, on a ledge.
Two companions stayed with Ferrerio while others went for help.
Outside, they had to walk a mile to reach a telephone. At 11:09 the
Sheriff's Office was called; the first rescue units arrived at 11:38 a.m.
Workers from a nearby logging operation cut a makeshift road
through the woods but rescuers still had to climb three-fourths of a
mile up the side of Brady Mountain to reach the entrance.
A little after noon a team entered, reaching the victim in about an
hour. Two rescuers rappelled down to the victim and secured him
with rope. He was determined to have shoulder and chest injuries;
they started an IV, applied a cervical collar, and covered him with a
blanket. The cave was cool (52 degrees) and very wet from spring
runoff, and hypothermia was a potential problem.
Because of the narrow passages, a conventional stretcher or board
couldn't be used, so they managed to tie a rope stretcher. The
evacuation took over four hours, working the victim through the
narrow tunnels and up over ledges. Ferrerio also had to be hoisted
up the 65 foot "Hell Hole." The victim was out by 7 p.m. He was later
determined to have a fractured left shoulder and fractured rib.
Reference: Scott Burgess "Rescuers free teen from Saltpeter Cave"
EMS Messenger July/Aug, 1989, p 3.
#
*
Be equipment failure - Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico May 1989 A
On the Memorial Day expedition to Lechuguilla Cave in New
Mexico, Ted Lappin was ascending Apricot Pit and suffered some
sort of gear failure. Apparently the locking carabiner attaching one
ascender to his seat harness unscrewed and the ascender sling
slipped out; the other sling was not safetied to the seat harness. He
ended up hanging upside-down from one foot by a chicken loop. By
the time Dan Clardy had ascended to the victim, his face was almost
black and he was possibly near death. He was helped upright, soon
recovered, and left the cave under his own power.
Reference: Dan Clardy Personal Communication June 1990.
*
*
Bx exhausted on long trip - Lechuguilla Cave, NM
May 1989
On the Memorial Day expedition to Lechuguilla Cave, a caver was
on a 70 hour trip. In the course of this she became so cold and tired
that she lay down in the mud and fell asleep. She was carried to a
dry site to sleep.
In Lechuguilla the U.S. Park Service has a rule against camping in
the cave, so camping is called "bivouacing;" yet there are numerous
reports of cavers caving without sufficient sleep-this is asking for
trouble.
Reference: Dan Clardy Personal Communication June 1990.
*
*
Cc caver fall, slipped - Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico May 1990 C
On the Memorial Day expedition to Lechuguilla Cave in New
Mexico, one caver ended up going head-over-heels down a slope,
suffering gashes on his back. Another was doing a traverse over a
chasm, holding a handline, when a Swiss caver jerked on the line
from one end, to see if someone was on it. The caver was jerked
from his holds and was saved by the handline.
Reference: Dan Clardy Personal Communication June 1990; Scott
Linn FT17Personal Communication July 1990.
*
*
*
Do other - late on timed trip - Lechuguilla Cave, NM
May 1989 D
On the Memorial Day expedition, Don Davis was on a trip in the
cave. At Lechuguilla there is a grace period of six hours in returning
to the surface beyond the specified time for a party, before the whole
expedition is suspended and a rescue is called out. Davis was
delayed so he told an exiting caver to extend his time in the log book.
That caver forgot and six hours after the specified time, the rescue
was formed. Fortunately, they met Davis at the entrance, as he
exited. This was doubly fortunate, for Davis and crew had been in a
different part of the cave than the rescuers expected.
Reference: Scott Linn, Dan Clardy Personal Communications
June-July 1990.
*

---------- Page 12 ----------
Cbi bad air, metabolic alkalosis - Dragon's Breath Cave,
California
6-4-89
On Sunday, June 4, eight cavers visited Dragon's Breath Cave in
the Mother Lode country southeast of Sacramento, California. This
cave and others in that area have been found to contain high levels
of carbon dioxide and have been under study for this phenomenon.
Part of the work involves monitoring carbon dioxide, oxygen,
temperature and relative humidity.
The group entered Dragon's Breath Cave, rappelling the 80 foot
entrance drop. After this there is a series of three squeezes and a
110 foot pit; four cavers went through the squeezes and two went
down the pit. The carbon dioxide level is 1.5% near the third squeeze
and up to 4.5% at the bottom of the 110.
After exiting the cave, Phalin Klusman felt sick and rested while
some of the others visited two other caves. At first, Klusman seemed
to recover but later appeared to go into shock. He felt cold, his skin
was pale and clammy, his pupils were constricted and his pulse
irregular. His companions took him as quickly as possible to the
nearest hospital, in San Andreas.
His blood pH was found to be greater than 7.5, a dangerously high
level; he was given fluids intravenously and a few hours later was
released.
References:
1) Jim Hildebrand "Bad Air Caving: A Trip to the Rock Pile Caves"
Devil's Advocate 22(7) July 1989, p 69-70.
2) Butch Fralia "Bad Air Detection" Texas Caver April 1989.
Analysis: "Apparently Klusman had gone into metabolic alkalosis.
The most likely explanation for what happened seems to be the
following. The body has two mechanisms for maintaining pH near an
optimum of 7.4: respiration and renal (kidney) function. Carbon
dioxide is an acidic gas; as levels of carbon dioxide in the body
increase, the resulting carbonic acid made by the reaction of carbon
dioxide with water stimulates the kidneys to release mildly basic
bicarbonate ion to maintain body pH in the desired range. A sudden
increase in the body's load of carbon dioxide, such as can result from
breathing air enriched with carbon dioxide, can lead to respiratory
acidosis. The kidneys respond to this situation by releasing
bicarbonate to bring body pH back into balance. One symptom of
respiratory acidosis is nausea, and the affected caver did throw up.


********** Unfortunately, the loss of stomach acid has several bad effects: a
reservoir of body acid is lost, and the dehydration resulting from the
loss of fluid reduces the kidney's ability to function. When the caver
exited the cave, normal breathing quickly removed the excess
carbon dioxide from his body; under normal circumstances, his
kidneys would have responded by absorbing bicarbonate to maintain
a pH balance."
"However, due to the loss of gastric acid and dehydration, his
kidneys were unable to function properly, and his body pH went
alkaline. As to what can be done to minimize the effects of this
problem, several things come to mind. Probably the most important is
to exit the cave at the first indication of a problem: headache, nausea
and the like. Also, it is important to stay hydrated for proper kidney
function; liquids containing electrolytes such as Gatorade should be
kept nearby, especially if someone throws up after being in a high
carbon dioxide cave. Of course, this only can be done if the individual
can hold down liquids, and certainly not if they are already in shock."
Apparently a simple test for bad air is a butane lighter; as oxygen
percent drops from the normal 21%, the lighter begins to flicker at
18.5% and there appears a noticeable gap of about one inch
between the jet and the flame, but the lighter can be re-lit if
extinguished. At 17% and lower, a lighter goes out and cannot be
re-lit. Apparently a carbide lamp will burn at oxygen levels that a
person cannot tolerate.
*
340 NSS News December 1990
Ar rockfall - Mammoth Cave, Kentucky
6-16-89
On Friday, June 16, a group entered Mammoth Cave in Mammoth
Cave National Park, Kentucky, as part of the Karst Geology course at
Western Kentucky University. Before entering the cave, the hazards
were explained and emphasized; this was repeated at Brucker's
Breakdown in the cave. The group assumed a 5 to 6 foot separation
between cavers while climbing the breakdown pile. As Nestor Rivera
(26), from Puerto Rico, started to ascend, the person just ahead of
him dislodged a "square-shaped" rock some 2x2x2 feet in size,
which slid 8 to 10 feet. Rivera was prevented from moving back by
people just behind him, waiting their turn to climb, so he caught the
rock with his left hand. Another student helped him with the rock and
Rivera continued his climb. Later he began to feel pain, but felt able,
so he continued for an hour until the tour started back. The leader
inquired as to his welfare several times.
On the return, the pain had increased, so the wrist was splinted; his
pack was carried by a companion and he was watched over. Rivera
completed the exit, through some crawls and over slippery mud,
under his own power.
X-rays disclosed no fracture, and the wrist has completely
recovered.
Reference: Nestor Rivera NSS Accident Report undated, 3 pp.
*
*
Bc caver fall, heel hang - Greenhorn Caves, CA
Summer 1989 A
In the summer a group of five cavers was attempting to traverse
from the Upper Entrance to the Upper Middle Entrance in Greenhorn
Caves, a talus stream cave in the Sierra foothills.
On the hike to the Upper Entrance they had stopped and rigged a
cable ladder to facilitate getting out the lower entrance on their
through-trip. The group consisted of Jose Razo, Don and Lisa
DeLucia, Scott Schmitz, Mark Tillman and Carl Diaz. Two of them
had explored in Greenhorn before, but it had been two years and the
memory had faded.
They proceeded down climbs and stream passage, finally coming
to a drop that was 30 feet or so and didn't appear climbable. No
bypass could be found, so at a ledge 6 feet down, they rigged a 60
foot 6-mm rope, doubled so that it could be pulled down and brought
with them. Two descended but as Schmitz lowered himself to the
ledge, his pack caught on the projecting rock roof. He twisted to free
it and it came free, but as he leaned back to get it, it pulled him over
the edge.
He screamed but almost immediately stopped falling-the heel of
his left boot had caught in a crack and he was suspended over the
edge, hanging by one heel.
Schmitz, with great presence of mind, grabbed for his figure-8,
already attached to his seat harness; as he did this, someone clipped
him into webbing hanging down the first step. Thus belayed, he
clipped the figure-8 into the rappel line, was lifted a bit by those
above so the heel would come free, pivoted around and rappelled
down. "He collapsed into a bowl of jello that couldn't be moved for
ten minutes."
Reference: Scott Schmitz "A Nightmare Trip Through Greenhorn"
The Explorer Oct. 1989, p 108-111.
Dicx lost, caver fall, exhaustion - Greenhorn Cave, CA
Summer
B
In the course of the previously mentioned trip into Greenhorn Cave,
a carbide lamp was lost in a pool, Don DeLucia had lost a contact
lens and was proceeding with one good eye, Mark Tillman was
bruised from a 6 foot fall onto jagged rocks in a blind pit, while
route-finding, as well as the already described heel-hang by Scott

---------- Page 13 ----------
Schmitz. The route proved to be elusive and the ordinarily 8-hour trip
had become nearly twice that long. At one point the group sat
shivering under a space blanket for two hours while Tillman and Diaz
searched for the route. When they finally reached the ladder,
Schmitz's strength gave out at the lip and he had to be helped up it.
Reference: Scott Schmitz "A Nightmare Trip Through Greenhorn"
The Explorer Oct. 1989, p 108-111.
*
*
Bt trapped, foot in toilet - Hoaches Cave, Ohio
Summer 1989 C
In the summer of 1989, four cavers tried to visit Hoaches Cave
near Twinsburg in Ohio. At the scene, the ravine containing the
entrance was found to be filled with trash. As they tunnelled through
this to reach the entrance, Floyd Herold's foot became stuck in the
trap of an old toilet. They had to bash the toilet to free him, and never
found the entrance. (Is this real??? Ed.)
Reference: Bob Nadich "The Lost Hole Of Hoaches" Cleve-O-
Grotto News 35(7) July 1989.
*
De equipment failure - Bigfoot Cave, California
Summer 1989 D
A group of cavers was exiting Bigfoot Cave, California, via the
Discovery Entrance. Jim Wolff was just below the constriction at the
top of the upper drop, when he stopped ascending to adjust his gear.
He opened his chest box to facilitate passing a ledge, then moved
the lower ascender up. When he raised the upper ascender, a
non-self-locking Gibbs, it failed to set and he fell backwards. He was
saved from going completely upside down to a foot hang by the
safety from his lower ascender to his seat harness. He was able to
get upright and continue.
Reference: Jim Wolff Personal Communication June 1990.
*
*
*
*
*
*
Dr rockfall, near miss - Bigfoot Cave, California
Summer E
A small group of cavers was exiting Bigfoot Cave in Siskiyou
County, California, using the usual route, the Discovery Entrance.
This entrance begins with a sink, with vertical walls on two sides and
a steep 30 foot slope on the other sides leading to a narrow cleft at
the bottom. This descends rapidly for 20 feet to the edge of a 75 foot
drop with two steep, loose rock ledges about 10 feet wide making the
complete drop somewhat diagonal. The whole affair is 10 feet wide
at most and any rocks dislodged at the top are likely to hit anyone on
rope. Standard practice is to ascend, call "off rope" and get up and
out of the sinkhole as fast as possible. The person waiting to come
up next waits two minutes after hearing "off rope" and then goes up.
The bottom of the 75 is a narrow ledge that drops another 65 feet
free to one of the main passages of the cave.
Mark Fritzke ascended and called "off rope," then moved out of the
cave. He hesitated on the sinkhole slope but on a part that led to a
protective lip at the entrance cleft. Steve Knutson waited the two
minutes and started up. Above, Fritzke was stepping over the lip of
the sink when his foot dislodged a football-sized rock which bounded
down the slope, over the protective lip and into the entrance.
Below, Knutson heard the rock coming and shoved off, grabbing
projections on the side of the first step, conforming amoeba-like to
the surface. The rock went humming harmlessly by.
Reference: Mark Fritzke Personal Communication July 1990.
*
*
*
*
Bh hypothermia - Unspecified Cave, California
Summer 1989 F
In the summer a group of cavers were pursuing various tasks in a
54 degree cave in the western Sierras of California. At the back of
the cave, part of the group surveyed while one member descended
to a sump pool and swam around to see if there was a continuation.
Derek Hoyle was videotaping these operations. This apparently
didn't require a lot of movement and he gradually became cold.
Afterwards, everyone but Hoyle went to survey in another part of the
cave. Hoyle had something to eat and suffered a "hypoglycemic
crash" and fell asleep. He was wearing a PVC caving suit over
polypropylene thermal underwear.
Eventually another caver returned, woke Hoyle to let him know they
were still surveying, and went back to the survey area. Hoyle soon
discovered he was very cold and started to look for the others,
shivering uncontrollably and teeth chattering. He climbed down into a
room where, because of the hypothermia, he forgot what the problem
was and began walking in circles around the room.
Two cavers were surveying in an adjoining room and saw him go
by, calling to him on three revolutions. After he had gone by six times
they realized something was wrong. Hoyle was made to sit down and
was given food and water; his wet clothes were taken off and his
wetsuit was put on him. The other survey party showed up and he
was escorted out of the cave.
Reference: Derek Hoyle Personal Communication June 1990.
*
*
*
*
Dc caver fall - Unspecified Cave, CA
Summer 1989 G
In the summer, a group of cavers was surveying in a cave in the
western slopes of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. After a long session
the tired cavers headed for the entrance. At the point where the
stream entered a lower level, they proceeded along the narrow
canyon passage. The last caver in line, Derek Hoyle, was walking
along when, without warning, the floor collapsed. He caught himself
at chest level with his arms, preventing a fall down a narrow crevice
to the stream, 35 feet below.
Reference: Derek Hoyle Personal Communication June 1990.
Dc near-caver-fall - Un-named Cave, CA
Summer 1989 H
At the entrance of a cave high on the face of a rock quarry in Santa
Cruz County, California, cavers were moving rock in an effort to gain
entrance. They had traversed out a ledge to get to the site and were
over 50 feet above the floor of the quarry. One caver bent into the
entrance hole and pulled hard on a jammed rock. The rock suddenly
came free and the caver was very nearly propelled over the edge.
Reference: Derek Hoyle Personal Communication June 1990.
Bte trapped - Unspecified Cave, Tennessee
July 1989
In July, two people descended a 30 foot pit entrance to a cave in
Grainger County, Tennessee. They were unable to climb hand-over-
hand back up their ski rope so the authorities were notified. A rescue
squad as well as local cavers were called out. The rescue squad
arrived quickly and pulled the two out "using the ski rope and a
tractor."
Reference: Jeff Cooper Personal Communication July 11, 1989.
*
*
*
*
*
Bel lost, light failure - Rehoboth Church Cave, WV
7-15-89
On Sunday, July 15, two cavers entered Rehoboth Church Cave in
eastern Monroe County, West Virginia. These were a man and a

---------- Page 14 ----------
boy, with hand-held lights, wearing tee-shirts, jeans and tennis
shoes. They visited the Long Room, but became lost when they tried
to retrace their steps. They wandered until they reached the top of a
breakdown pile only a few hundred feet from the entrance. Here their
lights failed so they sat down to await rescue.
At 8 p.m. relatives of the lost pair called the Union Volunteer Fire
Department, who in turn called two local cavers. They arrived at the
cave at 9 p.m. and found the victims a short time after entering. They
were shaken but unhurt and were escorted out.
Reference: Jim Tompkins "Rescue at Rehoboth Church Cave" The
West Virginia Caver 7(5) Oct. 1989, p 5.
AAdhf drowning, couldn't swim - My Cave, West Virginia 7-23-89 A
On Sunday, July 23, four cavers, Aaron Bird, Jarrod Leland,
Bonnie Flanagan (21) and Sean Flanagan, planned on a cross-over
trip in My Cave in Pocahontas County, West Virginia. This would be
a short trip, going in the Elk River Entrance, through the large,
upper-level, mud passage, down the Outhouse Drop, upward
through the Dune Room, and out the Dry Branch Entrance. All four
had been in My Cave before and were familiar with the route, though
none had done Outhouse Drop. All had experience with 40 to 60 foot
drops. Bird, the trip leader, had visited the cave ten times and had
been to both the top and bottom of the drop. They had three packs,
two "huge, well-stocked horizontal packs and a vertical pack."
On the approach to the cave, although it apparently had not rained
recently, the "normally dry" Elk River was flowing. They forded it
twice, three getting wet only to their knees but Bonnie Flanagan fell
in up to her chest.
Just before 10 a.m. they entered the cave and took their time
moving down the trunk passage, pausing to check a side lead and
look at sodastraws.
At Outhouse Drop it was obvious that things were not normal-a
waterfall below the drop was roaring and it was "very, very noisy."
The drop is a long, slippery mud slope of maybe 20 degrees for 60 to
80 feet followed by an 80 foot, partly free, section to a steep mud
slope at the edge of a cave stream, an Elk River tributary.
The rope was rigged to a boulder in the crawlway before the drop,
by Bird who intended to go back out the Elk River Entrance, do some
ridge walking, and meet his companions at the Dry Branch Entrance.
Leland descended slowly, untangling the rope as he went. When
he reached the bottom he found, instead of the normal trickle of
water, a deep pool, of swimming depth. He got off the rope, yelled
"off rope!" and was understood. He had descended without his
ascending gear, however, and, though he wanted to ascend, could
not and needed someone to bring the vertical pack down. He yelled
up for Bird and the vertical gear, but this was not understood. Bonnie
Flanagan descended with the vertical pack, landing in waist-deep
water on the mud slope.
Leland did not realize she had the vertical pack-he thought it was
a "horizontal" pack-and decided she should go to the other side of
the flooded stream to wait. Even with the vertical gear present, he
doubted that she could climb the drop. The only difficulty was that
she was "already hypothermic" and "he knew Bonnie could not
swim."
Bonnie de-rigged from her figure-8, took off the pack, and asked if
it would float. Thinking it was the "horizontal" pack, Leland said that it
would, and warned her that the water was over her head.
Wearing cotton coveralls and her vertical gear, she started across
the 30 foot gap "half-floating, dog-paddling," with the pack on one
arm. At the halfway point she went under.
Leland had a webbing handline but had not thought to tie it to the
victim, and did not now think to throw it to her. He did jump in,
grabbing at her shoulders, trying to find a pack strap. They
floundered about; Leland, exhausted, also was drowning. Somehow
he caught the knot at the end of the rope and pulled himself up,
342 NSS News December 1990
caught a breath and got to shore.
The two above had not heard Bonnie yell 'off rope!" but it went
slack so they assumed she was off. After a minute or two, Leland
began to shout. It was obvious something was very wrong, so Bird
sent Sean Flanagan, Bonnie's brother, out to get help while he
rigged in and started down.
While still on the mud slope, Bird realized he had neither of the
packs; he tried to climb back up to get them but the mud was too
slippery. He continued down; at the vertical portion, he had to wrap
the rope around his leg for friction-the muddy rope was too fast for
the figure-8.
At the bottom he found Leland in waist-deep water on the mud
bank shouting, "She's in the water! She's in the water!" Bird ordered
him out of the water and told him to shut up and calm down. When
he tried to walk along the mud bank, he slipped and got completely
wet. Both were wearing poly-pro and wool thermals under a nylon
over-suit, but the water was very cold. Leland was already
hypothermic and had only a mini-mglite going.
Leland related what had happened and they agreed that Flanagan
was dead. They got across the water, half-swimming, half-floating,
and climbed upward, toward the Dune Room. Leland could not get
his main lamp to re-light.
At the muddy slope that rises to the Dune Room, Bird had to scoop
steps with Leland's lamp reflector so they could climb it. Bird's
carbide light had flooded at one point and soon went out; they had
only the mini-maglite. They climbed high in the Dune Room, almost
to the Junction Room, and sat down and huddled together, to wait for
rescue.
The rescue was well-manned and elaborate but only served to find
the two in the Dune Room, four hours after they sat down to wait.
The body was found by cave divers late the next afternoon, ten to
twenty feet from the bottom of the rope, minus the pack and the
caver's helmet.
References:
1) George Dasher "The My Cave Rescue" The West Virginia
Caver 7(5) Oct. 1989, p 6-9.
2) Ed. "Caver Drowns" The Pocahontas Times July 27, 1989.
Analysis: What was done wrong?
1) At the Elk River crossings it was obvious that something had
gone badly wrong, weather-wise, and that the cave, a tributary of Elk
River, would be affected.
2) Bonnie Flanagan got wet in the crossings, yet they did not hurry
on their cave trip, even though to go slow is to invite hypothermia.
3) At the drop, the water noise should have alerted them, yet the
victim, already becoming hypothermic, was allowed to descend.
4) A caver descended a drop without ascending gear, and worse, it
was into what were obviously potentially hazardous conditions.
5) They had pooled their gear so that no one had an individual
pack-no one had backup lights and vertical gear.
6) The leader did not descend first.
7) Bonnie Flanagan was allowed to try for the other side without a
line and not knowing how to swim. With a handline and rappel line
present, something might have been rigged.
It is stated that Aaron Bird "hoped to wean his three friends from
their dependence on his vertical expertise." Except for the
unexpected weather, it may have happened. The lesson to take
home is that several decisions made here were not good ones yet
are typical of decisions commoonly made by cavers. The difference
is that here an unusual and/or unexpected condition (the flood) made
those decisions fatal. The hard thing is to see something like this
developing-harder still is making a decision to abort the trip.
BI lost cavers - Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
7-23-89 B
On July 23 a group of thirteen cavers went to Tumbling Rock Cave,
Jackson County, Alabama. This was a "mixed bag" of cavers,

---------- Page 15 ----------
unfamiliar with each other and without a clear objective or trip leader.
A number of them were unfamiliar with the cave.
They headed back to the King's Shower where the group split,
some going to the Pillar of Fire, some returning to the entrance,
taking pictures, and some were undecided.
One group of nine cavers proceeded to the Christmas Tree. They
went through the Suicide Passage where there were only seven. The
last person in the party said two had headed for the entrance. They
proceeded to the Pillar of Fire.
One of the missing two had turned back because he had left his
pack at the King's Shower and his carbide lamp was running out.
Unfortunately, he could not find the way back and sat down to wait
for help-his backup flashlight was low on power. As his group
headed for the entrance, about two hours later, they heard him
calling from the lower levels. He had missed a turn and was definitely
lost. The other had met up with another party and exited safely.
References:
1) Tom Moss "Incident in Tumbling Rock" Unpublished report,
9-18-89, 3 pp.
2) Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 31(6), p 44-45.
Analysis: Tom Moss admits that his impatience in getting the group
split before everyone had really made a decision contributed greatly
to the confusion. This is another of the minor incidents that could
have been serious with just a little bad luck.
*
Cr rockfall, speed kills - Great Onyx Cave, Kentucky
7-25-89
On Tuesday, July 25, a crew of volunteer cavers was working in
Great Onyx Cave in Mammoth Cave National Park in Kentucky. They
were assisting in the removal of trash from the cave. The afternoon
of the 25th saw them moving debris from a pit in the cave
three-quarters of a mile to the entrance with wheelbarrows. British
cavers had joined the team that afternoon and when it was explained
that it took 30 minutes to get to the entrance with a wheelbarrow,
they took up the challenge and did it in 7 minutes, 26 seconds.
Unfortunately, in the course of this, at about 3:45 p.m., David Irving,
at the base of the stairs, was struck on the left cheek by a dislodged
rock. The resulting laceration took several stitches to close.
Reference: Larry Reece "NSS Restoration Field Camp - 1989" CIG
Newsletter Oct. 1989, p 125.
Co other - carbide burn - Sinking Cove Cave, Tennessee
8-1-89
On August 1, three cavers went to caves in the Sinking Cove area
of Tennessee as part of the Guidebook tours of the annual NSS
Convention. They entered the lower entrance to Sinking Cove Cave,
planning to do a crossover, leaving the Waterfall (upper) Entrance.
Geoffrey Frasz (41) carried his and another caver's spent carbide in
a plastic ziploc bag. They had already been in waist-deep water in
another cave earlier that day. The dump sack was in a Lost Creek
pack worn over-the-shoulder, with the pack under his left arm. They
got into chest-deep water but there was no problem with the pack
since it had drain holes, and the water would just drain down his left
leg. He was wearing jeans and a denim jacket.
Halfway through the cave he began to feel an irritation on his upper
left thigh. He figured it was just some sand that had entered and was
rubbing, or the jeans were too tight. By the time they exited the cave,
however, it was very irritating. He lowered his pants to reveal a hot
red patch of skin on the upper thigh. He walked back to the car
slowly, with his jeans undone, and drank some water that tasted of
carbide, from a bottle in his pack. At the car the pain was such that
he became nauseous and vomited. The following morning blisters
had appeared and broken ones were oozing. It was diagnosed as
second degree burns.
Reference: Geoffrey Frasz Personal Communication 8/10/89.
Analysis: The spent carbide caused the burn and also weakened
the fabric of the jeans so that they later tore at the point of the burn. It
is important to take note of this capability of "spent" carbide, for one
often carries vertical gear or lines in the pack with spent carbide.
*
*
*
Ac caver fall, holds failed - Doghill-Donnehue Cave, Indiana 8-6-89
A CIG trip was scheduled for the weekend of August 5-6, to
Doghill-Donnehue Cave near Bedford in Lawrence County, Indiana.
The group of 20 cavers was led by Scott Fee and entered the cave at
10 a.m. on Sunday, August 6. Fee initially tried to keep the group
together, but this proved difficult, so they split up.
The main group got through Berg's Squeeze but were moving
slowly enough that two were getting cold. One gets wet because of
the 'Bathtubs," two crawl sections with low air space. They decided
to split the party further, Fee and the cold cavers going out the
culvert entrance, two going back and collecting the ones still at the
squeeze and going out the Boat Club entrance after the main group
used that entrance. Back at the squeeze, Bill Bunting got stuck for 45
minutes so the group of three there, Bill and Betty Bunting, and John
Hartman, headed back for the Doghill entrance.
Very quickly they came to a ledge traverse/climb that they had
negotiated on the way in with the help of another's handline. That
was no longer available but there were two old, knotted ropes that
were present; these were tied on the end toward the squeeze, but
not on the other. The ledge was crumbly, dry clay over rock.
They talked it over and did not want to climb without a safety line so
they used the old ropes. Betty Bunting was the youngest, smallest,
lightest and a "good technical climber," so she volunteered to go first
and rig the rope at the other end, to the natural bridge.
There were two ropes so she used them both, lowering herself
slowly and smoothly-soon she was over the ledge and got some toe
holds to take some of the weight off the ropes. It was undercut below
the break-over so she could not yet get any handholds. As she
released the ropes to move her hold on them, the toe holds failed
and she fell about 15 feet to the first level, landing on her feet with
knees bent, but her right leg broke on impact. It was 3 p.m.
She informed the two above of this and that the leg needed a splint
for her to be able to move. Hartman did the climb without a safety,
checked on her condition, then headed for the entrance. Short of the
Doghill entrance he met two cavers coming in to check on them.
They went back out, got supplies and re-entered via the Culvert
Entrance which was closer to the scene of the accident, though on
the other side of the squeeze. The victim was wrapped up for warmth
and one caver, an RN, stayed with the victim until the rescue arrived.
The other got Bill Bunting across the ledge and took him out the
Doghill Entrance. The callout produced the required manpower and
equipment-a Ferno-Washington stretcher was remembered to be
hanging on a wall in the Bedford Fire Department Office and the
Bedford Water Works was persuaded to cease all filter flushing since
it would affect the water levels in the "Bathtubs" in the cave.
Before the evacuation began, a spare sleeping bag was positioned
on the dry side of the bathtubs, to allow re-packaging of the victim
after getting soaked while traversing those pools. There was no
trouble with public agencies who were content to offer assistance
and backup and let the cavers take care of it. This they did, by all
accounts most efficiently, and the victim was out about 1 a.m.
Monday morning.
References:
1) Betty Bunting NSS Accident Report 5 pp, undated.
2) Will Ott Cave Incident Information Form 8-7-89, 12 pp.
3) Laura Lane "Injured Woman rescued from Bedford cave" The
Herald-Times Tuesday, Aug. 8, 1989.
4) Scott Fee "Just Another Routine Grotto Trip" CIG Newsletter
Oct. 1989, p 119-120.

---------- Page 16 ----------
5) Betty Bunting "CIG Doghill-Donnehue Trip From the Injured
Party's View"
Analysis: Bunting believes that her "cotton gloves did not give an
adequate grip," and contributed to the fall. The primary problem,
however, is clearly that the traverse/climb was left without proper
rigging, and thus there was no provision for retreat which could be
necessary in any party. The old ropes should not have been left
there if they were weak-to do so is to invite an accident.
The rescue apparently took far less time than expected because
Bunting was able to pull herself along through the low air-space
pools. At a hospital it was found that both lower leg bones were
broken. The left one was surgically set with a metal plate and eight
screws.
Ac caver fall - unseen hole, following a leader - Sharer's Cave,
Pennsylvania
8-26-89
On Saturday, August 26, a group of Boy Scouts was being led
through Sharer's Cave, near Centre Hall in Pennsylvania. Cavers
Gary Danmire and Craig Arble were leading three scout troop
leaders and seventeen boy scouts.
The group was proceeding down a passage of stooping height
when suddenly Brian McMahon (11), the seventh scout (and 12th
overall) in line, fell through a hole in the floor, 23 feet to the floor of a
room below, breaking his pelvis.
Help was called, including the Nittany Grotto. Initial rescuers
lowered an EMT through the hole and he attended the victim who
was placed in a harness, raised back to the passage above, and
strapped into a soft-sided litter with a built-in backboard. Rescue
squad members and cavers then transported the injured boy to the
entrance room. The litter was then lifted up the large breakdown
blocks at the bottom of the room and to the entrance. An ambulance
was waiting.
Reference: Keith Wheeland "Rescue in Sharer's Cave" Nittany
Grotto News 36(5) Fall, 1989, p 16-17.
Analysis: The leaders warn of the hole and word is passed back but
at some point, say twelfth, someone is talking to friends, not paying
attention-surprise!
*
Ao trapped - Ludington's Cave, West Virginia
8-27-89
On Sunday, August 27, two young cavers were exploring in
Ludington's Cave in Greenbrier County, West Virginia. These were
James Patton and his cousin, Kevin Patton. When they headed for
the entrance, they came to the 40 foot climb about 800 feet from the
entrance. James was able to ascend the rope with Jumars. When
Kevin tried he reportedly injured a knee and was unable to continue.
James exited the cave and called the Sheriff's Office which in turn
called out cavers.
Cavers arrived at the cave in the afternoon; a crew entered and
rigged a second rope with a rescuer ascending alongside Kevin, to
encourage him, to no avail. A second crew entered and set up a
mechanical advantage haul system: a rope attached at the top of the
drop, then through a pulley attached to Kevin's harness, then through
a pulley at the top of the drop. With a belay and safety Jumar, the
victim was hauled up. Once up, Kevin Patton "practically ran" for the
entrance. Rescuers speculated that when the single set of Jumars
was dropped down the rope from James to Kevin, one Jumar struck
him in the knee, resulting in the call-out.
Reference: Patty Daw "Here we go again- The Ludington's Cave
Rescue" The West Virginia Caver 7(5) Oct. 1989, p 5.
344 NSS News December 1990
Bft trapped by flooding - Snail Cave, Alabama
8-30-89
On Wednesday, August 30, three cavers entered Snail Cave, in
Morgan County, Alabama. The entrance to the cave is in a
streambed; under normal conditions the stream sinks upstream of
the entrance, only entering it at times of heavy rain. After they had
entered, it began to rain heavily.
"The cave has a crawlway/stoopway for about 150 feet, then a 12
foot climbdown, then a 30 foot pit. A very low but wide crawl leads off
at the bottom." The three went through the crawl but shortly after
water began to pour through. Two got through the crawl but Mike
Martin was trapped on the other side. In fact the crawl was soon two
feet under water.
One of the two exited the cave and called the authorities. The usual
agencies responded and caver rescuers were called out. When
rescuers got to the entrance side of the crawl, there was 5 to 6
inches of air space there, but part of it was still sumped. Martin dug at
the far end to help lower the water level. He was soon able to get
through and exited the cave under his own power.
Reference: Bill Varnadoe "Snail Cave Rescue" Huntsville Grotto
Newsletter 31(7) p 50-51.
Analysis: Varnadoe has a couple of criticisms:
1) "Not to enter low wet caves in the teeth of expected rains!"
2) The rescuers were delayed and confused as to equipment
required by lack of a cave name. Anyone involved in a rescue should
emphasize this to the Sheriff's Office involved.
*
*
*
Dc caver near-fall, unseen pit - Bigfoot Cave, CA September 1989 A
On a trip into Bigfoot Cave, Siskiyou County, California, a group of
cavers were videotaping. They started at the Discovery Entrance,
with two cameras, one manned by Derek Hoyle and the other by Bob
Richardson.
The Discovery Entrance pit series is only two drops. The first is a
75 with two broad, sloping ledges. The landing for this drop is a 3 to
5 foot wide ledge that leads partway around the second, 65 foot free
drop. The first pit is located 25 feet inside the cave, down a narrow,
windy crevice. For safety and communication purposes,
groups do one drop at a time, assembling at the intervening ledge
until everyone has done one drop.
One caver descended to the ledge with flood lights. Richardson
came next; Hoyle taped the start of Bob's descent and asked how
deep the drop was; Hoyle had not been in that entrance before.
Richardson told him the depth of the first drop but did not elaborate
that there were two drops. He proceeded to the ledge.
With Richardson taping and the other caver holding the lights,
Hoyle descended. He reached the bottom of the drop, got off rope,
and, with the camera rolling, turned around and all but stepped over
the edge of the unsuspected second pit!
Reference: Steve Knutson Personal Communication September
1989.
Analysis: Ordinarily, a caver descending the first drop would be
warned to get off rope and stay on the ledge. Because of the
videotaping, however, everyone was being silent, forgetting that
Hoyle was unaware of the second drop. A new hazard in caving and
a near-fatality.
Dr rockfall, spontaneous - Lechuguilla Cave, NM
Sept. 1989 B
At Lechuguilla Cave a group was exiting. As Ray Keeler crossed
over the top lip at Boulder Falls, a "microwave-sized rock" fell,
missing the other four members of the team, who were all "in

---------- Page 17 ----------
appropriate safety zones." Everyone acknowledged OK so he
completed the climb. After he reached the top a second rockfall
"broke loose of its own accord." The rope was pulled up and found to
have no damage. Keeler then rappelled back down, cleaning ledges
of debris. Ray Keeler "Lechuguilla Cave Project" D.C. Speleograph
Nov. 1989, p 12-13.
De equipment failure, worn rope - Lechuguilla Cave, NM
9-5-89
On Tuesday of the Labor Day week expedition to Lechuguilla Cave
in New Mexico, two teams were to come out from a survey in the
east part of the cave and two to pass them. One of the Easter
Borehole teams reached the Aragonitemare descent and proceeded
down. Ann Bosted was the last of her team of four. Thirty feet down
she discovered an inch and a half sheath separation. She continued
20 feet further to a ledge; there she was able to re-anchor the rope
and continue the remaining 150 foot descent. They left a note for the
incoming camp crews.
When the second outgoing camp team got to the drop, the first one
down found the separation to be 7 inches; he stopped, tied a knot
and continued, passing the knot. With the knot and re-anchor in the
rope, there was little slack at the re-anchor causing some difficulty.
Another rope was retrieved from further back in the cave. The
problem caused the team to be 9 hours late, resulting in a rescue
callout which was aborted when they were discovered heading out.
The rope was caving rope but the drop had obviously been poorly
rigged.
Reference: Ray Keeler "Lechuguilla Cave Project" D.C. Speleo-
graph Nov. 1989, p 12.
*
*
Ble lost, light failure - Cave near Bowling Green, Kentucky 9-8-89
At 10:30 p.m., Friday, September 8, Greg Herschel (22), David
Pieroni (19) and Josh Pierpont (15) entered a cave near the
apartment complex where they lived, on the outskirts of Bowling
Green, Kentucky. They became trapped when they "lost their
flashlights." They were only 5 or 10 minutes into the cave but without
light were unable to find their way out.
The following morning they were reported missing and an hour
later they emerged muddy and cold, 13 and one-half hours after
entering. Pierpont said, "If I would have been down there a couple of
days, then I would have started to worry."
Reference: Ed. "3 rescued after 13 1/2 hours in cave near Bowling
Green" Lexington Herald-Leader Monday, Sept. 11, 1989.
*
*
*
*
De equipment failure, glove caught - Nielson's Well, Utah 9-18-89 A
Nielson's Well, in the mountains of Utah, is regarded as a cave
from which rescue would be very difficult. The cave has a 315 foot
entrance drop, has an hour and a half hike and 30 minute drive to
reach the nearest town, and so far is nothing but narrow slots and
pits to reach the bottom at -647 feet. The cave is 39 degrees with
drafts and wetness.
On September 18, David Herron was rappelling the entrance pit
when a glove was "sucked" into his figure-8 so fast that one finger
was hopelessly trapped and very painful. His ascenders were not
where they could be reached one-handed. He was forced, despite
the pain, to force the rope through the descender until he reached a
2 foot ledge 10 feet lower, where he could take some of his weight off
the rope and ease the pain. He was unable to get free and no one
heard his cries for help-he had told everyone else to go ahead, that
he would catch up. He continued down, feeding the rope through
until the glove disintegrated, allowing him to rappel normally.
Reference: David Herron "The Nielson's Well Nightmares" The
Utah Caver 2(1), Jan. 1990, p 8.
Analysis: In a cave such as this, that everyone regards as a
"serious" cave, it is more important than usual for parties to stay
together.
Bs stuck in crack - Nielson's Well, Utah
9-18-89 B
On a trip into Nielson's Well, a caver decided to try getting through
Doubleback Crack, even though everyone was convinced he could
not make it and he was warned not to try. He became "seriously
stuck." Dave Shurtz grabbed his boots and pulled but this did no
good. The caver began to panic, tensed up and started breathing
erratically. It was feared that he might pass out and he fought to
control it, with soothing words being spoken around him. Gradually
he relaxed and was pulled out. Had he passed out, he would have
slid downward into an "impossible" position and trapped Glenn
Shurtz on the side away from the entrance.
Reference: David Herron, ibid., p 8.
*
Cc caver fall, hold broke - Nielson's Well, Utah
9-28-89 C
On a September 28th trip to Nielson's Well, Dave Shurtz was
climbing Barrier Pit to an obvious higher lead. He decided to free
climb as high as possible before putting in a bolt, to save time. He
got about to the top and, of course, was not in a position to put in a
bolt, so instead of coming back down and starting an aid climb with
the bolts, tried to "go-for-it." He stood on a tiny flake which
disintegrated and he fell 20 feet, landing hard on a cobble floor. As a
reflex (he didn't remember it) he pushed off from the wall and flipped
over as he fell. This kept him away from jagged rocks and allowed
him to "break his wrist instead of his head or back." He was able to
exit under his own power.
Reference: David Herron ibid. p. 8.
*
*
De equipment failure, bolt bent - Nielson's Well, Utah
9-28-89
After Dave Shurtz's fall, a bolt was placed on the wall of Barrier Pit
to facilitate further exploration. It was, however, of "inferior quality"
and bent under weight and then stripped its threads when tightened.
Luckily it did not fail when someone was climbing on it.
Reference: David Herron ibid., p. 9.
Analysis: One must watch the "hardness" of bolts to be used in
climbing by marks on the head. A suitable hardness is "Rockwell 5,"
indicated by 3 dashes radiating from the center of the head, on top. It
is possible to obtain bolts of extreme softness at hardware stores
these days and some stores are unaware of the hardness quality.
*
*
Da acetylene explosion - Ashmore Spring Cave, Alabama 10-21-89
On October 21, a group of three cavers was surveying in Ashmore
Spring Cave in Alabama. Ed Kilgore was apparently using an ammo
box for a pack. At one point the box suddenly exploded-spent
carbide inside apparently had built up sufficient pressure to force the
lid open. The can then exploded, upon ignition from a flame 3 feet
away. No one was injured but the can was badly bent by the
explosion. One could imagine that this could easily have had
disasterous results. Don't put carbide in rigid containers.
Reference: Tim Stickley "The Ashmore Cave Saga" Huntsville

---------- Page 18 ----------
Grotto Newsletter 32(2), p. 17.
BI lost caver - incompetent - Wind Cave, South Dakota
10-22-89
In October of 1989, the National Outdoor Leadership School
(NOLS) spent 8 days at Wind Cave National Park, teaching caving
techniques to students. On October 22, NOLS students entered the
cave to conduct a mock rescue. They apparently assigned an
instructor to be the "victim" and gave the victim time to get lost; then
the students searched in teams.
At about noon, one of the students, Rachel Cox (18) had problems
with her light and traded with another student. She then entered the
Room Draculum/Cataract Room with Scott Smalley, searching for the
victim. She left her pack, with her extra lights and water, in that room.
They searched the Cataract Room where they split up to search
smaller side leads. After a bit, her lamp ran out of water and ceased
to function.
After waiting in the dark for Smalley for a while, she began to crawl
around. After a bit, she urinated in her lamp to get it going and
moved on, now in unfamiliar passage.
NOLS eventually realized she was missing, presumably when
Smalley could no longer find her at the Room Draculum area, called
off their rescue and began to look for her. After an hour and a half of
this, they informed the Park Service that she was missing. The Park
Service initiated incident command procedures, called in local
cavers, employees with cave experience, and more NOLS people.
The first official search was by Park employees and a search dog,
for an hour and a half. This was followed by five teams of mixed
origin. These left the cave at 8:15 Sunday and were replaced by four
more teams. The teams were staged from the Post Office Room in
the cave, where telephone communication was available. Teams
searched by sectors, the findings of teams being added to a master
map. Others were assigned to be monitors on the tour route in case
she was wandering and showed up there. By 9 p.m., 50 cavers were
involved in the search.
Cox meanwhile had proceeded out of the search area, going down
the Overland Trail and the AU survey. At some point her light went
out again but she continued to crawl on in the dark and lost her lamp
and hard hat down a fissure. She ended up passing down through a
fissure to a lower, unmapped level below the Overland Trail route.
The call went out for more caver/searchers and teams were fed,
rested and rotated as they searched the area where she
disappeared, a 3-D maze, into Monday morning.
On Monday the search area was widened and crews searched new
areas, concentrating on main passages, shouting for Cox. At about
10:15 Monday night, voice contact was made with Cox from the main
level above her and after the fissure was cleared of boxwork, she
was able to exit, under her own power, at about 2:30 a.m., Tuesday
morning. She was treated at a hospital for dehydration and a "form of
hypothermia."
References:
1) Paul Berger "The Rescue Review" Rocky Mtn. Caving Winter,
1990, p 8.
2) Ed LaRock "The Search for Rachel Cox-More on the Wind
Cave Rescue" ibid.p 9.
3) Garry Petrie "How to Get Free Passes to Evan's Plunge" ibid.
Autumn, 1989.
4) Cheryl Brandner "Area Cave specialist helps find lost woman"
Tribune (Spring Valley, Minn.), Nov. 1, 1989, p 3.
Analysis: This accident would not have happened if NOLS were not
giving caving courses.
It is stated that "a total of 110 searchers for 1,800 man-hours and
about $30,000 were spent in the search." If she had not been found
when she was, "between 200 and 300 people would have been
involved in the search by the next morning." One can hope that the
bill for this was sent to NOLS.
346 NSS News December 1990
It is difficult to believe that someone who had just completed a
caving course could behave SO poorly and so irresponsibly. One has
to think that either the course was very poor, or Cox was
incompetent, in which case the instructors should have taken note
and not let her go off on her own, unsupervised. In either case the
responsibility belongs to NOLS.
Cox's faults are obvious-she went off by herself with only one
light. When that light went out, she did not stay put.
Pisarowicz says "Cox would never have been found except she
had been hitting a rock against a rock wall and the search party
heard the sound. If Cox had been sleeping or unconscious when the
search party had gone by, she probably never would have been
found." The passage she was in was not on the map.
*
*
Dcf caver fall, running from flood - Falling Springs Cave,
Arkansas
Fall 1989
In Falling Springs Cave, a group of cavers was exploring when
they began to get the impression that there was an increase in water
flow. They finally decided it had increased and started back
downstream, hurriedly, but not in full rout.
At the Unsafe Underpass, Richard O'Hara was climbing down from
a breakdown room. Twenty-five feet above the canyon floor he sat on
a very steeply-sloping rock and set his camera down. He looked for
holds to use in descent and suddenly his camera started sliding. He
reached for it, and began sliding down the slab. Thinking fast, he got
his feet under him, and leaped across the eight foot gap, to a four
foot ledge. He then climbed down and tried to collect his wits. A
companion joined him and helped him calm down-after all, the cave
was flooding.
They continued on and safely exited with the water flow "at least
twenty to thirty times" what it had been.
Reference: Richard O'Hara "High Tide at Falling Springs Cave"
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 31(8) p 59-60.
*
*
*
*
Ce equipment failure, rack threaded backwards - Ellison's Cave,
Georgia
11-11-89 A
On November 11, a group of nine cavers entered the New
Entrance of Ellison's Cave on Pigeon Mountain in Georgia. They
intended to do Fantastic Pit and tour the bottom of the cave to the
foot of Incredible Pit.
At the Warm-Up Pit (125 ft free), seven descended. Rick Haley
prepared to go down by turning down the flame on his carbide light.
He then fixed his rack to the rope. The rack had rusty tubular steel
bars and in the dim light they "blended in with the color of the
surroundings." Consequently, he skipped using the third bar. When
he started back over the lip, the bottom four bars, rigged backwards,
popped off.
Fortunately the top two bars kept Haley attached to the rope and
he was able to wrap the rope around his leg enough to get friction to
slow the fall. This happened just before the bottom and he still
"landed pretty hard" in a flat area of gravel and water.
His three-layer leather gloves were worn through to "raw flesh" and
he had suffered rope burns as well as some trauma. Thus educated,
he continued on to do Fantastic Pit and the rest of the trip without
further incident.
Reference: Jay Reeves "Cave Accident" Unpublished report, July 9,
1990.
Analysis: Reeves states that Haley is an experienced mountaineer
but had not done much vertical caving. He points out that a safety of
some sort above the rack should have prevented the incident, and
that stainless steel or aluminum bars, or the newer sheet stainless
steel bars or "C" shaped bars would have made the mis-rigging

---------- Page 19 ----------
unlikely.
I must state that I once rigged a rack with bright, shiny bars totally
backwards, but I have developed the habit of putting my weight on
the set-up (in a direction other than the edge of the drop) before
going over the edge and so can tell you about it. A good habit.
Haley must be commended for his presence of mind in using leg
wraps to slow the fall. Regarding the dim light, remember that it is
novice cavers that burn themselves; one obviously should turn lights
up, not down, when going down a pit.
Cr rockfall - the old rake trick - Ashmore Spring Cave,
Alabama
11-11-89 B
On November 11, a crew of cavers was working in Ashmore Spring
Cave, on Gunter's Mountain in Alabama. One team was surveying
when Tim Stickley noticed a lead in breakdown. He moved some
rocks and crawled in. As he put his weight on one long stone, the
other end flew up and hit him in the mouth, cutting his lip.
Reference: Tim Stickley "The Ashmore Spring Cave Saga"
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 32(2) p 17.
*
*
*
Ac caver fall - Crooked Creek Ice Cave, Kentucky
11-11-89
At about 11 a.m. on Saturday, November 11, a group of boy and
girl scouts plus scout leaders was guided into Crooked Creek Ice
Cave in Rockcastle County, Kentucky by Tom and Brett Karaus of
the East Tennessee Grotto, NSS.
They entered the horizontal entrance leading to the two lower
levels of the cave. They went through a short crevice and belly-crawl
and did a climbdown into a large room. Across this they did a short
climb-up, chimney and then a 20 foot climb up a slope to reach a
small room on the third level. A short crawl leads around breakdown
and overhangs the second level at a wide crevice. Forty feet past this
is a 30 foot domepit with a tricky traverse along the left wall; the first
five feet is sloped at a thirty degree angle toward the pit, the rest is
only a foot wide, but is flat.
Brett Karaus went to the far side of the pit and secured a 7/16 PMI.
With this handline set, a scoutmaster, Pat Evans (45), positioned
about halfway across. Each scout then traversed wearing a "chest
harness and crotch strap" and safetied to the line with a carabiner.
After several had gone across, Evans turned toward Tom Karaus,
on the near side, took a few steps, and lost his holds. He fell for 16 to
20 feet, striking a ledge 8 feet down that turned him so that he landed
on his back, on a "relatively flat" slab of breakdown. A backpack may
have taken some of the impact as did a canteen which burst at the
seam on impact.
Tom Karaus yelled down, found that Evans was conscious and told
him to stay put. They reached him in about three minutes. He had
suffered injuries to his left foot and had pain in his right side. They
decided to allow him to self-rescue.
The pit entrance to the cave was only 60 feet from the start of the
traverse, so they started the rest of the group out that entrance while
bringing the others back across the traverse. Other scout leaders
helped Evans to the bottom of the entrance pit.
Soon the scouts were all out and Evans and assistants were at the
pit. Apparently this pit is climbable so they put him in the chest
harness and crotch strap and belayed him up with all the adults
helping. He was transported to a vehicle on a make-shift stretcher.
Reference: Tom Karaus NSS Accident Report undated, 4 pp.
Analysis: The victim had a broken bone in his left foot, two badly
sprained fingers on his left hand, and bruising on his right side and
back.
As Karaus points out, the victim fell on a slope where several
others had crossed. If he had been more careful, he probably
wouldn't have fallen. But there is no excuse at all for not holding the
handline. Better still would be to wear a harness and clip on or tie to
the line. Sounds like the scouts were learning better than the scout
master.
BI lost, light failure - Cueva Del Diablo, Naucalpan, Mex. 11-12-89
On Sunday, November 12, a group of boy scouts was exploring in
the mountains of Montezuma and Cristo Rey in Naucalpan, Mexico.
Four of them became lost when they went exploring in the Cueva del
Diablo. They were found by searchers on Wednesday, 70 hours after
becoming lost. One has to suspect that they had insufficient lighting.
References:
1) L. Tapia, M. Lino, and E. Hacho "Rescatan Vivos a los 4
Jovenes Extraviados en Cavernas de Atizapan" Excelsior Thursday,
Nov. 19, 1989, p1.
2) E. Hacho, M. Lino "Aun Perdidos, 4 ninos, en Cerros de
Naucalpan" ibid. Wednesday, Nov. 15, 1989, p 1, 4.
3) Luis Romero Personal Communication Nov. 17, 1989.
Ac caver fall - Clark's Cave, Virginia
11-18-89 A
On Saturday, November 18, a boy scout troop was camped on a
farm in the Millboro District of Bath County, Virginia. The troop went
exploring in nearby Clark's Cave. They proceeded some distance
into the cave before one of the scouts, age 11, fell 30 to 40 feet,
breaking his right arm. The authorities were called and at 2 p.m. fire
department and rescue squad personnel responded. The boy was 15
minutes into the cave, but it took three and a half to four hours to
evacuate him through the "narrow passages requiring them to crawl
or even inch along on their sides for much of the way." While still in
the cave, they were unsure of the extent of his injuries.
Reference: "Boy Scout Receives Injuries from Falling in a Cave"
Covington Virginian undated.
*
*
Ao other - dislocated kneecap - Ellison's Cave, Georgia 11-18-89 B
On November 18 at about 9 a.m., Heath Many (16) and Lewis
Puckett (26) began a cross-over trip in Ellison's Cave on Pigeon
Mountain near Lafayette, Georgia. They had rigged the pits on a
previous trip. They entered the Stairstep Entrance, descended the
120, 90, and 440 foot drops, and proceeded through the one mile of
main passage toward 586 foot Fantastic Pit.
They were at a chimney climb between the Stream Passage and
TAG Hall. Puckett ascended the chimney but when Many got
three-fourths of the way up, he suddenly felt severe pain in his left
leg. He retreated to the bottom; Puckett got webbing from his pack,
tied to a boulder at the top of the drop and descended to Many.
Many's left kneecap was dislocated, rotated laterally left. He was in
severe pain and experiencing nausea.
They knew a procedure for relocation and, though a painful
process, used it-the only alternative would be a protracted and
difficult rescue. Many gradually and painfully worked strength back
into the joint. After 45 minutes, Many was able to stand on Puckett's
back and using his good leg and the webbing, climb the pitch.
At Fantastic Pit, he climbed top tandem with a rope walker, with a
switch to a Texas possible if the bad leg proved unusable. At the top,
Puckett got on a ledge to take his weight off the rope to allow Many
less difficulty in getting over the lip. They proceeded out slowly with
no further problems. A visit to a doctor revealed no bone fragments
but a splint, then a cast, followed by physical therapy were in order.
Reference: Lewis Puckett NSS Accident Report undated, 4 pp.

---------- Page 20 ----------
Analysis: Puckett states that the dislocation was not caused by a fall
but by a bad position while chimneying. There was no history of such
dislocations with the victim, who had been caving for three years and
was on his eleventh trip to Ellison's.
Frankly, anytime a self rescue is managed, it is something to be
proud of.
*
*
Df flood - Onesquathaw Cave, New York
11-19-89
At about 11:15 a.m. on Sunday, November 19, eight people visited
Onesquathaw Cave in New York. The main passage is a streambed
but is walking for about 400 feet to where the single side lead, an
upper level, takes off. The main passage continues with a right turn
as a duck-under about two feet high for about 50 feet; it then
continues walking and crawl for 1000 feet to a sump. It was a clear
day when they entered.
At the high lead they took it, rigging a rope as a handline. A little
way in they heard a strange sound. At the end of the lead, where it
has doubled back near the entrance, it was louder. They headed
back and when they neared the main passage, the sound was clearly
that of rushing water. There was now a foot of water in the main
passage. They decided to exit and did so, some getting wet nearly to
the waist. Outside it was slightly overcast with no sign that it had
rained.
They investigated and found, three miles up the road, a swampy
area covered with a layer of ice six inches above the ground. Hunter
tracks were in the area. The cavers speculate that hunters may have
breached a beaver dam to drain the area for hunting. Two hours later
the Onesquathaw streambed was dry. If they had gone into the main
passage crawlways, it could have been a serious situation.
Reference: Gail Jackson Personal Communication undated.
*
*
*
*
Co other - poked in eye - Cueva Cuchillo, Mexico
11-23-89
Late in the evening of November 23, David Locklear and another
caver were standing above the first drop into Cueva Cuchillo in
northern Mexico, when they happened to turn towards each other
and the other caver's Petzl lamp poked Locklear in the eye. The
other caver poured some water in the eye and then Locklear left the
cave. The other caver stayed because there was someone on rope
who could not be left alone.
Five minutes later, severe pain set in and Locklear became unsure
he could find the trucks, parked near Pozo de Montemayor, down the
road, because he was having trouble staying on the road. At the
trucks, he found no one and began yelling. Someone was asleep in a
truck; he poured water over Locklear's face. Another caver showed
up and drove Locklear down to camp while giving him ice to put on
his eye.
At camp, the pain had reached a peak and he was held down while
water was poured into the eye. A doctor was in the group, examined
the eye and pronounced it to be OK. Locklear spent a night in great
pain and when he finally got to Laredo and saw an eye doctor, the
doctor pronounced the eye OK and charged $40. Locklear actually
had a heavy-duty pain killer at camp, but was too dizzy and
distracted to remember. He thinks if this had happened at
Montemayor it would have been fatal since he wouldn't have found
the trucks and would have died of hypothermia.
Reference: David Locklear "Accident Report" The Texas Caver
December 1989, p 126-127.
*
Art rockfall, trapped - Un-named Cave near Austin, Texas 12-22-89
348 NSSs News December 1990
On Friday, December 22, three or four cavers entered a cave near
Barton Creek on the outskirts of Austin, Texas. The group explored
for some time and were heading out at around 7 p.m. As they neared
the entrance, where the cave spirals in twisting, narrow fashion up to
the surface, a 4,000 pound rock dislodged and shifted, trapping the
legs of Charlie Savvas (31) and leaving him in a "standing" position
in the small passage. His companions tried to free him but could not
and went for help.
Among various agencies who responded was "Texas Cave
Rescue. An EMT first crawled ten minutes to reach the victim and
administer a morphine injection. Using boards and a hydraulic jack,
the rock was lifted and at around 10:15 p.m., Savvas was free. His
right leg was splinted and he was evacuated from the cave.
Reference: Lydia Lum and John Bryant "Austinite freed after being
pinned in Cave" Austin American-Statesman Dec. 23, 1989, pp A1,
A9.
*
*
Bi illness, unable to ascend - Sotano de Cepillo, Mexico 12-29-89
On Friday, December 29, 1989, a group of 10-plus cavers visited
Sotano de Cepillo, near Tamapatz in Mexico. They arrived at the 120
meter (394 foot) blind pit at 2:20 p.m. The rope was rigged so that it
fell free from the edge. All descended.
Part of the group was British/Canadian and they ascended first.
The last of them became ill part way up and had to be hoisted the
rest of the way. This was done directly by use of the available
manpower.
Reference: Alejandro Villagomez "Sotano de Cepillo" The Texas
Caver February 1990, p 6-7.
*
CAVE DIVING ACCIDENTS
AAd - Blue Grotto, Florida
1-29-89
On the morning of Sunday, January 29, two divers entered Blue
Grotto, at Williston, Florida. They explored around and were in the
daylight zone at an area known as "Peace Rock." One diver, Josh
Petterson, signaled his partner to join him at the surface inside an air
bell. When he did not appear, Petterson went to look for him but
could not find him. He assumed he had misunderstood and surfaced.
Petterson surfaced, failed to find him and told three divers already in
the water that he was missing. They searched but were unsuccessful
as was a slightly later attempt by a management diver. At 12:35
Lloyd Phillips and J. C. Deen entered the water and searched,
especially in a silted-out area. They then searched the entire cavern
area, surfacing at 1:40 p.m. At 2:20 p.m. they entered again and
searched all logical places in the Peace Rock area. At 3:45 two other
teams entered the water and found the body in a breakdown area at
a depth of about 70 feet, below Peace Rock. The body was tightly
wedged between rocks. Only after deflating the BC and removing the
weight belt could they dislodge and remove the body. The tank was
out of air, regulator in working condition, both of his lights were
working.
Reference: Lloyd Phillips and Joe Harrell "Fatality at Blue Grotto"
Underwater Speleology 16(2) March/April 1989, p 19-20.
Analysis: The victim went off on his own, became silted out or
trapped and drowned, even though he had a buddy. Why did he
disregard the safety of his buddy? Lloyd Phillips says "It is my
opinion that he was playing 'hide and seek' and became trapped."
The victim was open-water certified and going into the deeper part
of the cavern, in a silty area, 40 feet from the guideline, was an
obvious mistake, as was "failure to exit with 2/3 of starting air, failure

---------- Page 21 ----------
to maintain a continuous line, failure to be properly trained, and
failure to maintain contact with his buddy."
AAd - Morrison Spring, Florida
3-4-89
Late Saturday afternoon, March 4, two open-water certified divers,
Tom Clark (32) and Mark Jebeles (29), entered Morrison Spring in
Walton County, Florida. Conditions were described as clear, but
"dark river water was flooding the cavern entrance." They apparently
followed the line, but it was close enough to the entrance that they
may have been forced into open water by the current. Their bodies
were recovered by divers on the scene. One had 1500 psi and the
other 800 psi left. Their lights were still working. Their equipment had
no apparent problem after inspection at a Panama City dive shop.
Autopsies found that "both divers had a lot of silt in their lungs and
stomaches." It was speculated that they may have stirred up silt and
panicked.
Reference: Wayne McKinnon "Fatality at Morrison" Underwater
Speleology 16(2) March/April 1989, p 19.
*
*
Do - Gilmore Springs, Alabama
3-18-89
On March 18, a group of people, including Dr. Jim Dobie of Auburn
University, were at Gilmore Springs, in Clarke County, Alabama.
They were interested in learning if the spring contained any
Pleistocene fossils.
Carl Rossell, a cave diver, went in and found the vent of the spring
in bedrock at only 25 foot depth. The vent was "a turbulent sand boil
of near zero visibility." He came up and reported that it was almost
impossible to enter and very dangerous. The professor asked if he
would take down a wire basket and get a sample of bottom
sediments as well as rock samples. This was agreed to and Rossell
descended. He ended up going "unintentionally" about 18 feet into
the cave, got turned around by the poor visibility and treacherous
currents, and "slammed his head on the ceiling." The basket was left
there, stuck on the ceiling by the force of the current. He still had the
rope attached to it, but all of them pulling couldn't budge it.
Reference: Steven Carey "Gilmore Springs" Huntsville Grotto
Newsletter 32(1), p 6.
AAd 1-Vortex Springs, Florida
3-19-89
At about 7:45 a.m. on Sunday, March 19, five divers including Dale
Kitchen and Drew Morrison, both open-water certified, entered
Vortex Spring in Holmes County, Florida. They were apparently
checking out the site for some sort of open-water training. The three
not named went into the cave zone while Kitchen and Morrison
remained in the cavern, near the entrance.
Flow conditions were described as normal-a slight outward push
but the spring had just been re-opened after dredging to remove silt
and there was more silt than usual at the entrance. The cave zone is
tighter than the cavern but has a sandy floor.
When the three returned from the cave, they found, at the surface,
that the other two had not returned. Divers from the Vortex
management went down and found the bodies about 20 feet into the
cave at a depth of about 48 feet. Both were on the floor and wearing
dive computers. Kitchen had 2500 psi left while Morrison had 1800
psi; both had stage tanks. Their gear was disassembled at the site by
recovery divers.
Reference: Wayne McKinnon "Fatality at Vortex" Underwater
Speleology 16(2) March/April, 1989.
AAd - - Cenote Bolom Chojol, Yucatan, Mexico
9-10-89
On Sunday, September 10, four divers went to Cenote Bolom
Chojol near Merida in the State of Yucatan in Mexico. Two of them
were novices, being taught cave diving by two friends. One novice
was making his first open-water dive, the other had less than two
years of diving experience. The four went to a depth of 90 feet,
penetrating about 210 feet. This included the 90 foot pit about 120
feet from the entrance of the cave.
As they ascended the pit, one of the students had a light problem.
This was corrected and the two experienced divers left the cave,
expecting the others to follow. They did not appear. A search
commenced but was unsuccessful.
The bodies were found several days later. They appear to have left
the line in confusion and headed deeper, into unexplored cave at
-120 feet. They did not have wetsuits, weight belts, BCD's,
octopuses, or depth gauges. They had only one SPG and one light
each.
Reference: Jim Coke "Cave Death in the Yucatan" Underwater
Speleology 16(6) Nov/Dec, 1989, p 15.

---------- Page 22 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Accident Report Form
Date of Accident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name (s) of person (s)
Age
Sex
Experience
involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving
Accidents" is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
( ) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
( ) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver. weather. equipment. clothing.
etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( ) Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose copies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
Time:
State
Zip
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 23 ----------
This
page
intentially
left
blank
