
---------- Page 1 ----------
American
Caving
Accidents
National
Speleological
Society
LIBERTY
SOCIETT
ALA
MEDICAL

---------- Page 2 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
EDITORIAL
On reading back through the reported accidents of 1968, 1969, and
1970, I found that those of 1971 repeated most of the established
themes. Involved were the usual handful of adventurers who were
attempting feats far beyond their ability and for which they were ill-
equipped. In the most extreme of these, a fatality, the victim was
descending a more than 100 foot pit on an old fence. In another, two
boys were drowned while siphon diving without any caving or diving
experience, or any diving equipment. In both of these accidents and
many other accidents, inadequacy of many types emerges as the culprit.
What is and what isn't adequate in terms of experience and equipment,
is clearly visible in most of the 1971 accidents. More hidden, and
therefore, more insidious, is the inadequate caver.
It is quite chilling to realize how little value some of the victims
of the accidents placed on their physical and mental well-being as a
necessary part of being adequately equipped to handle a given cave.
"He was bleeding from the ear before entering the cave"; "Two days
before entering the pit, he suffered from kidney illness"; "He was wet,
cold, and tired, at the top of the drop"; "She was nervous and shakey
at the beginning of her descent": All of these quotations describe
the victims in four vertical accidents of 1971. One was a fatality.
In the first two of these, the cavers were incompletely equipped
because of their debility and were as much potential victims of mishap
as were the boys who rigged the old fence to descend the pit. Being
cold, wet, and tired, on the way out of a cave, can't always be avoided
but excellent physical condition can certainly buffer the effects -
the lowered ability to avert and correctly respond to a crisis. And,
nervousness is not a bad ingredient in a caver. A nervous person is
apt to be more careful but, by the time a person is shaking with
nervousness, as in the last mentioned report, their ability to think
clearly is questionable and they are prone to panic.
In short, 1971 accidents newly uncovered the need for cavers to
begin to consider good mental and physical condition, part of being
an adequately equipped caver.
page 1
Jennifer Anderson
American Caving Accidents
Copyright, August, 1974
National Speleological Society,
All Rights Reserved.

---------- Page 3 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
New Mexico, Guadalupe Cave. In October, 1970, Carol Hill (30), an
experienced caver and one of a group of 18 people, was climbing in
a chimney about one half mile from the entrance. She fell 25 feet
when a rock projection which she was using as a handhold, broke.
As serious back injury was suspected, a litter evacuation was con-
sidered necessary. The cavers on hand organized the rescue using
blankets folded over pipes to form a litter. The injuries were sub-
sequently diagnosed as cracked ribs, a bruised right lung, and minor
cuts.
Source: Carol Hill
Analysis: As a result of the accident, rock conditions were consid-
ered to be poor. With 25 feet of exposure, however, a belay should
have been used; regardless of the rock conditions. More careful
testing of each foothold and handhold before all the weight is placed
on it, might have disclosed an unstable projection and thus, have
prevented this accident.
Wyoming, Big Horn Caverns. On January 23, 1971, Renee Savio (19), a
grotto beginner, was slightly injured while rappelling into the 65
foot pit entrance to the cave. She was with three others, Joe Mueller,
Jin Chester, and Lee Tierney; all N.S.S. and grotto affiliated; who
had come to the cave to measure the entrance for a gate. They rigged
the pit for rappel and Mueller, the most experienced caver, descended.
Savio followed. About one third of the way down the pit at a point
where it narrowed into a vertical fissure about four feet in width,
the rocks were slippery with snow. Savio slipped and apparently let
go with her braking hand; hitting her head. She fell out of control
for 25 feet before her fall was arrested by Mueller who was at the
botton of the pit. He immediately moved the victim to cover. Jim
Chester arrived at the botton 5 minutes later with a first aid kit.
Although the victim was breathless for a short time, first aid proved
unnecessary and the party continued on into the cave. There were no
subsequent complications.
Source: Joe Mueller and Lee Tierney
Analysis: Savio was "nervous and shakey" before the accident and
probably should have been dissuaded from dropping the pit. That
state of mind makes people accident-prone and when an accident does
occur, nervousness coupled with inexperience, makes incorrect react-
ions probable. She should have instinctively grabbed harder on the
rope when she slipped rather than letting go as she did.
She was using only one carabiner and brake bar as a rappel rig
which does not provide enough control under most circumstances. Two
page 2

---------- Page 4 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
carabiners and 2 brake bars in tanden configuration, should have
been used; and it is regrettable that her more experienced compan-
ions did not discourage her from descending on her inadequate rig.
Cold weather and slick conditions, and bad technique (not leaning
back enough, braking hand too far behind her), were cited as contrib-
uting conditions by Tierney and Mueller.
Tennessee, Conley Hole. On April 7, 1971, Bill Bromer (17) was
injured in a fall from the top of the 180 foot bell-shaped pit
entrance to Conley Hole. Bromer, an experienced pit caver and one
of a party of 8 from Brebeuf High School Spelunking Club, Indianap-
olis, had spent 4 hours exploring the cave and was returning up the
pit when the accident occurred. He was wet and tired and, at the
top of the rope, was attempting to get his prusik knots over the lip
when they slipped on the muddy rope. Thinking that he was falling,
he clutched at his prusik knots in panic. This further prevented
their from catching and he began to rapidly slide back down the rope;
all the while holding tightly onto his knots. Just as he was about
to hit the ground, he threw out his hands to break the fall; thus
releasing the prusik knots. They caught and held him which saved
his life but not before he had hit bottoin and bounced; due to the
stretch in the rope.
Brower, although injured, was talking and concious. News of the
accident was relayed to the top and the leader, Lou Larocco, sent
down a note containing first aid information. He was covered with
a space blanket to protect him from the water which was falling into
the pit. Some short time later he was ;moved away from the waterfall
to a safer and more confortable place. Blankets, warm clothing,
medical supplies were relayed from the cars to the victim. Two
people left for help with a description of his condition. The Warren
County Rescue Squad, headed by Roy Davis, hoisted the youth to the
surface in a litter; four hours after the fall. An ambulance took
him to Riverpark Hospital where a diagnosis of a broken talus (ankle)
bone and a bruised chin was pronounced.
Source: Nicholas Noe
Analysis: This caver should, by instinct, not have touched his
prusik knots when he first felt the unpleasant sensation of slipping.
Had he left them alone, the knots should have automatically grabbed
and locked on the rope almost instantly; thus holding him at the
top until he could right himself and continue out of the pit. He
was reported to have been wet and tired when the accident occurred.
It is probable that both of these conditions contributed to his in-
correct reaction to the mishap; cold and fatigue hamper the ability
page 3
and

---------- Page 5 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
to think clearly in a crisis.
His companions handled the situation well and the fact that
exposure and shock did not compound the ankle injury, is largely
due to their knowledgeable exertions. (Read "Almost Tragic Accident
at Conley Hole" by Roy Davis, for a very thorough account of both
the accident and the rescue operation. It is printed in the May,
1971, Speleonews.)
Alabama, Gray's Cave. On April 10, 1971, Michael Malakowski (24),
a member of Huntsville Grotto for 4 months, was injured in a fall.
He had been attempting a climb-down and, five feet from the floor,
his foothold gave away. A broken leg was suspected so his compan-
ions called Huntsville for rescue aid. He was placed on a litter
and carried out of the cave. He was admitted to hospital because
of bone bruising, tissue damage, and some internal bleeding and he
remained there overnight.
Source: Darwin Moss
Analysis: It seems that the climber should have been belayed down
the drop and may not have been paying sufficient attention to test-
ing each foothold and handhold before trusting all of his weight
to them. The original report, however, was lacking in detail, so
that it is difficult to know under what precise conditions the fall
occurred. The degree of difficulty of the climb, its depth, rock
conditions, and the climbers footwear, all important details for a
useful analysis, are not noted.
Georgia, Cemetary Pit. On May 15, 1971, 16 people were exploring
Cemetary Pit on a Georgia Tech. Outward Bound trip. Of these 16,
6 were N.S.S. and grotto members, and experienced pit cavers. Three
others had a little pit caving experience. The other 7 had very
little horizontal caving experience and no pit caving experience.
After about 5 hours of caving, the first group started out ot the
130 foot pit entrance to the cave. Three hours later there were only
3 people on the bottom. Two of these, Bill Hunsaker and Lawrence
Catchpole, started out together on three knot prusik systems and each
on a rope. Catchpole, at a point when he was about 15 feet higher
than Hunsaker, accidentally kicked a rock (about a double handfull
weighing several pounds) off a ledge. It hit Hunsaker squarely in
the center of his hardhat. He reached the ledge, however, but while
on the ledge, he complained of dizziness, nausea, and a headache (no
mental confusion or pupil dilation was apparent). A rescue pulley
page 4

---------- Page 6 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
was rigged and he was then pulled out. A jumar safety was used at
the top while hauling.
Catchpole was at this time being violently sick on the ledge.
Upon questioning, it was discovered that he had kidney trouble sev-
eral days before and that pressure of his seat sling on his kidneys
was causing great pain. He was hauled out on the already rigged
pulley.
Source: John Sevenair
Analysis: The two ropes were rigged too close together. Had they
been rigged much further apart, it is unlikely that a rock kicked
down by one caver, could have hit the other. Having two or more
ropes rigged in the same pit so that more than one person can des-
cend or ascend at the saine time is very useful but, when narrowness
in the pit causes the ropes to come close together, it is far safer
to rig only one rope.
The lack of previous vertical experience and instruction for the
many beginners in this pit should be noted. Equipment was shared
and, given that cavers come in widely dissimilar sizes, ill-fitting
for some. In addition, the ratio of beginners to very experienced
pit cavers, much less than 1:1, was unfavoratle. These conditions
all contributed to the liklehood of mishap on this trip.
Catchpole should have not been caving after recent illness.
West Virginia, unnamed pit in Greenbrier County. On May 23, 1971,
the 60 foot pit was rigged with two 30 foot sections of ladder. Mike
Peduzzi (22) started down the ladder, belayed by J.E. Gravennier.
When Peduzzi was about 15 feet up from the bottom of the pit, the
lower ladder broke (both strands). He fell only about 2 inches before
he was caught on belay. Gravennier slowly lowered him to the pit
floor. No one was hurt due to the effective belay. The broken
ladder was replaced with another ladder then Peduzzi climbed out,
belayed, under his own power.
Source: J.E. Gravennier
Analysis: (Gravenider) The cause of the accident was faulty equip-
ment. The ladder was old and had not been tested for over a year. A
visual inspection was given to the ladders prior to rigging the pit
and they looked O.K. This seems to point out the definite need to
have a planned testing of all rope and ladders on a scheduled basis.
Also, this accident points out the need for a belay to be used with
all ladder work.
page 5

---------- Page 7 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
Texas, Sparrow Sink (near Alpine). In early June, 1971, a young
from Ft. Stockton, Texas, was fatally injured in Sparrow Sink An
old fence was being used as a ladder for the more than 100 foot drop.
The fence broke and he fell 50 feet to his death. He was not a caver;
nor were his companions.
Source: Dan Watson
Analysis: Untrained, inexperienced, and ill-equipped, this group of
adventurers should not have considered going down the pit by any means.
Using an old fence as a ladder was the ultimate in folly.
Alabama, Hooper's Well. On June 2, 1971, Steve Powell (16) and Murray
Walker (16) obtained a long length of 1/2" electrical power cable to
use as a rope for exploration of a pit that they had "found". The pit
is known as Hooper's Well, a 91 f'oot free-fall pit, open to the out-
side, with no passages at the bottom, located within the city limits
of Huntsville. After tying the cable to a tree with a square knot
and dropping the rest into the pit, Powell began sliding down receiv-
ing minor skin abrasions to his left leg and hands. Unable to climb
up the cable, he sent Walker for help. Time: ap proximately 8.00 p.a.
Walker called the Police Department who called the Madison County
Rescue Squad. The Rescue Squad asked the Police Dept. to dispatch a
policeman to the County Courthouse to contact the Huntsville Grotto
which was holding its monthly meeting. The Huntsville Grotto Chair-
man and Grotto Rescue Coordinator, dispatched three able vertical
cavers to Hooper's Well. Time: approximately 8.30 pin.
Source: Darwin Moss and Fill Varnedoe
Analysis: (Moss and Varnedoe) Adventuresome, albeit inexperienced,
youth. Both boys were informed of the N.S.S. and the Huntsville Grotto's
next regular meeting. Hopefully, accidents of this nature will con-
tinue to be injury-free. The Huntsville Grotto cannot hope to reach
every adventure-seeking youth in its caving area no matter how many
talks we give to schools, youth organizations, and civic groups.
California, Church Cave. On June 18, 1971, Werner Jesse (24), an ex-
perienced pit caver with no grotto affiliation, arrived at the Cliff
Entrance and prepared to lower photographic equipment down a pit to
Michael Selna and Raymond Rodrigue who had entered the cave at a
lower entrance and were at the foot of the pit below him. Selna and
Rodrigue were planning to photograph Jesse's rappel after all the
equipment had been lowered. Two bags of photographic equipment were
page 6
man

---------- Page 8 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
lowered and untied then, after raising the rope, Jesse started to
tie on the last bag. He was standing on an 18 inch flat ledge, 146
feet from the botton.
The two below heard a rumble. They dashed to the wall but before
they reached it, the bag containing over $1500 worth of photographic
equipment had smashed with a roar onto the rocky floor. They looked
up and called to Jesse. There was silence. Rodrigue turned and saw
a broken and torn body only five feet away. Jesse had obviously
died instantly. Rodrigue estimates that the falling body missed him
by only 2 feet.
Deeply shaken by the sudden tragedy, Rodrigue and Selna started
for help. Before reaching the entrance, however, they met a group
of cavers from Diablo and Sierra Mojave Grottos on a joint caving
trip. Two of these cavers went to Grant Grove to notify park author-
ities and obtain a stretcher. The body was placed in the stretcher
and eventually lifted to the top. The unpleasant task was made even
more difficult by narrowness and overhang near the top of the pit.
It took over six hours to remove the body from the cave.
Rodrigue recalls that Jesse had an ear operation a couple of
years before. He was bleeding from the ears the night before the
accident and had placed cotton swabs in his years before going into
the cave. Rodrigue suspects that this night have resulted in a loss
of equi ibrium or a temporary blacking out.
Source: Hugh Blanchard
Analysis: (Blanchard) This tragedy simply underscores the absolute
necessity of being alert and tied in whenever possible when near the
top of the pit.
(Anderson) Whether or not Jesse's ear problem caused the
fall, he should not have been in the cave with any medical problem.
Alabama, Stevens Gap Cave. On July 4, 1971, a large group of cavers,
all grotto affiliated, visited the cave as a training session for the
less experienced members of this group. Steven's Gap Cave has two
entrances - one is a 132 foot pit, 30 feet in diameter and open to
the outside, while the other entrance is a steeply sloped walking
passage approximately 50 feet from the pit. This horizontal passage
is about 200 feet long and connects with the pit entrance where it
drops off 30 feet to the floor.
After the more experienced cavers had "yo-yoed" the pit, Joyce
Carpenter (21) again descended to give belays to the trainees.
page 7
Guy

---------- Page 9 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
Gunter (19) went into the horizontal entrance and was at the junction
of the two entrances, about 30 feet above Joyce, relaying communic-
ations, when he slipped from the ledge. According to Joyce, he fell
the full 30 feet, landed on his chest, bounced, and remained uncon-
scious for about 5 minutes. Time: approximately 12.00 noon.
By 1.00 pin word of the accident had reached the Huntsville Grotto
Rescue Squad. From the description of Gunter's injuries, broken ribs
and a punctured lung were suspected. They gathered two blankets, cut
two poles for a stretcher, and walked to the pit.
John Cole rappelled down to Gunter and with help from Joyce tied
him and the stretcher to the main rope. As the stretcher was slowly
pulled up to the 30 foot ledge, Cole climbed another rope alongside
the stretcher to prevent it from hitting the side of the pit. At
the ledge the stretcher was untied and hand-carried out of the cave.
Time: 3.30 pin. While the stretcher was being pulled up, Mirian
Cuddington telephoned the Huntsville Hospital with a description of
Gunter's possible injuries.
Gunter was admitted to the hospital at 4.45 pin where he remained
for approximately a week. In addition to a ruptured liver, internal
bruises, and many external abrasions and bruises, he received 6
stitches in his right elbow.
Source: Darwin Moss
Analysis: (Moss) Gunter does not remember falling or landing on the
rocks below. Apparently he "blacked out", causing his body to relax,
thus possibly saving his life. Gunter does not have a history of
dizzy spells or black-outs. I must assume that he merely slipped
from the wet ledge. Although somewhat a novice in vertical caving,
Gunter was skilled enough to accomplish Steven's Gap Cave.
(Anderson) This accident points to the necessity of being
tied in when it becomes necessary to stand near the edge of a drop.
West Virginia, Organ Cave. A mile and a half into the labyrinths of
Organ Cave, two young friends of John Canfield (16) lowered him by
Parachute cord about 15 feet to the floor of a chamber. The friends
were unable to hoist him up and so Canfield climbed from a stream bed
at the bottom of the chamber onto a bank. That was about 9 am Friday
and for the next 12 hours Canfield had little to do except reflect
on why people should not explore caves without proper equipment.
Rescuers en tered the cave at 5.30 pin Friday, after Canfield's coin-
panions got word to the authorities that their friend was stranded.
They pulled him out through a waterfall in the stream and emerged
from the cave at 11.15 pin.
page 8

---------- Page 10 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
Source: The Evening Star, Washington, D.C., August 23, 1971
Analysis: These boys should have been accompanied by an experienced
caver who could have advised them on the choice of proper equipment
and would have undoubtedly vetoed the parachute cord descent.
Missouri, unnamed cave on Courtois Creek in Huzzah State Forest. On
Sept. 1, 1971, Billy Lotz (40), Bill Pitti, and Pat Downey, none of
whom had any caving experience or affiliation with a caving organ-
ization, entered the above cave at about 8.00 air. They passed through
the entrance cavern, a 20 foot crawlway, then another cavern until
they were confronted with a high ledge with a 15 foot long tunnel
slanting upward from it. Pitti stayed in this cavern while Lotz and
Downey negotiated the tunnel. At its end, and about 6 feet above
their heads, there was a small hole. Without difficulty - there were
many footholds and handholds - they climbed up into the small room
above the hole.
On the return journey some ten minutes later, Downey descended the
hole into the tunnel then waited for Lotz to do the same. Lotz
lowered himself until Downey said he was near the ground, then dropped
about one foot to the floor. His feet slid out from under him on the
slanting, slick floor and his lower back heavily hit the ground. He
tried to stand up but the pain was so intense that he returned to the
floor. Any movement below the waist triggered severe pain. He lay
on his stomach while Downey and Pitti went for help.
They summoned the conservation agent in Leasbourg Fire Tower, the
sherrif's office, a Cuba ambulance service, and the State Forestry
Office at Sullivan. From these contacts, a party of four rescuers
entered the cave with a stretcher. Lotz was strapped into this and
evacuated without further incident. Four hours after enterine the
cave, he was in Sullivan Hospital where a diagnosis of "severely
wrenched back" was pronounced.
Source: Rilly Lotz
Analysis: This is one good example of how a little slick and can
turn an easy cave, well suited to novice caving, into one of potent-
ial hazard. This group, being completely inexperienced, should have
had at least one experienced caver with them. He would probably have
advised Lotz to use the plentiful footholds to descend the drop rather
than dropping to the slick floor; dropping, leaping, or jumping in
cave is dangerous because of the slick, unstable flooring usually
found underground.
page 9
a

---------- Page 11 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
Mexico, Gruta El Carrizal. On November 26, 1971, Chris Cleveland (18),
Bruce Stone (17), both Explorer Scouts and inexperienced cavers, were
drowned while attempting to push a siphon to get to dry cave passage
beyond. The following extractions are taken from reports submitted
by Jon Everage (21+) who was leading the Explorer Troop, and various
other people who were involved in the search and rescue operations
following the disappearance of the boys.
(Everage) The members of Post 43 and guests left Houston, Texas, on
Wednesday, Nov. 23 for Busta Mante to go caving. We arrived on Thursday
morning, up camp, and spent the rest of the day preparing for the
next two days of caving. On Friday morning we traveled over to the
cave Carrizal which was near the camp. Upon reaching the cave the
large group of approximately 20 people divided into parties, one group
going into the cave first, and the other following their in about 10
minutes. The cave is a simple one with large walking passages on two
levels and a spring fed siphon at the end of the lower level passage.
This siphon had been entered many times and consists of a swin of
around 25 feet under water to reach the other side of the cave.
While one group was caving in the upper level, any group arrived at
the siphon. After a few moments I decided to push the siphon. I
undressed, took a light, swam under the rock, and entered the cave
on the other side. The cave is not extensive so after exploring what
there was, I swam back to the other side. Upon reaching the other
side, I found that the other party had joined ours at the siphon. I
answered questions about the other side and told everyone how far it
was and how to follow the roof of the tunnel to the other side. Then,
while I was putting on my clothes, Chris Cleveland decided to try to go
through. He said nothing to anyone but just went in before anyone knew
what was happening. This was approximately 3.15 p.n. After Chris had
apparently gone through, Fruce Stone deci ded to try, so once again, I
explained how it was done and after attaching a line to Bruce, he swain
in. After about 2 minutes, a couple of jerks were given on the rope
and it was pulled back untied. We therefore assumed that Bruce had
made it. Some of the party left and the rest of us sat down to wait
for their return.
After about 2 hours I because worried that something night have gone
wrong so I once again entered the siphon and went through. Upon reach-
ing the other side, I called for the two boys but received no answer.
I searched for their then returned. I then sent most of the boys after
the rest of the party to try to locate someone to help with the search.
That was around 6.15 pm. Later that night, we started trying to call
someone for help but to no avail. All the American Consuls refused to
answer even the emergency lines. We then called on an individual in
the U.S. and had him try to call the Government. This also proved to
be of no avail as he called everyone from the Air Force, Army, and Navy,
page 10

---------- Page 12 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
to the State Department in Washington. Failing at this he called
some cavers in the St. Louis area who were cave divers. They agreed
to come and prepared to come. In the meantime, some divers had been
located in Laredo, Texas, and after some delay, they arrived at the
cave on Saturday night. They dove in the siphon but found the water
too muddy so the search was stopped until the next morning. Early
Sunday morning they dove again. They found the bodies of the two
boys still in the siphon, off to one side. They felt that the boys
had panicked and drowned.
The bodies were brought to the surface by the divers who then
refused to help remove them from the cave. This job was done by
myself and some of the scouts as well as members of another caving
group which was helping. The bodies were taken to Laredo, Texas.
(Carl Kunath, Bill Elliot, Ronnie Fieseler, Jon Vinson - Association
for Mexican Cave Studies Newsletter, Vol. III, No. 4) Siphon diving
in itself is dangerous. The Carrizal siphon is especially treacherous
in that it is not a simple tube that one can follow blindly. To reach
the air-filled room one must stay to the right. At low water stages,
it is only about 10-15 feet horizontal distance to the other side. When
the water is only a little higher, the length of the siphon is greatly
increased. At the time of this incident, the water was up perhaps a
foot, but the siphon was about 25 feet long. To reach the other side,
one must dive at least 10 feet deep and follow the ceiling. The water
on the right side is about 15 feet deep. To the left. the floor drops
off to at least 40 feet deep and there are several small air pockets
in the ceiling. The bodies were found to the left, 40-50 feet from the
entrance to the siphon. Stone's body was floating against the ceiling.
Cleveland's body was within 15 feet of Stone's and was neutral in the
water.
Errors directly contributing to the accident.
1. The group from Houston was large and inadequately supervised.
Everage was responsible for 14 people. They were also ill-equipped
and inexperienced and were entirely too casual about going to Mexico,
more so about caving in Mexico.
2. Everage, group leader of the Houston group, set a poor example in
diving the siphon without taking the slightest safety precautions.
3. Cleveland, a near novice caver, attempted the same feat as Everage.
Everage said that he did not know Cleveland was in the water or of his
intentions and that at the time he was dressing on the bank with his
back turned.
4. Stone, a complete novice on his first caving trip, was allowed to
enter the siphon, his intentions perfectly clear. A rope was used,
was entrusted to a completely inexperienced belayman, and the signals
which were arranged were backward. Again, no time limit was discussed
for their proposed venture.
page 11
but

---------- Page 13 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
5. So far as can be determined, at no time was either of the boys
instructed as to the physical nature of the siphon, nor did they inquire.
Problems complicating the rescue effort
1. Few cavers go to Mexico with adequate contingency plans in case of
an emergency. After the incident, the Houston group was helpless and
could have done little to organize a rescue. Luckily, some of the non-
Houston group spoke spanish and knew what to do.
2. Communication problems.
a) The accident was in Mexico, but Americans were needed to help.
b) This was a major holiday weekend for Americans. Many of the
people who might have been able to help were unavailable, being
involved in various holiday trips themselves (this was only the
second time in 8 years that Kunath had been home during Thanksgiving).
c) A lack of information about who might be qualified to help,
and the absence of any back-up numbers for some key people (Laidlaw,
Florida Rescue, Fundrant, etc) who might have been able to help
3.
The help received from the American Government was worse than use-
less. The American Embassy in Mexico City has an emergency phone, but
no one would answer it. After wasting an hour of Kunath's time, the
Air Force refused to fly the St. Louis divers, even to Laredo, so long
as any commercial transport was available. The American Consul in
Nuevo Laredo cancelled the St. Louis diver's flight when the Laredo
divers were contacted - this could have been a serious mistake should
help have been needed. Once the bodies were recovered. the assistant
consul was contacted and asked to provide a police escort to Nuevo
Laredo and through the heavy holiday traffic. He did nothing.
loan appears to have been either stupid or drunk --- he asked ridiculous
questions, repeated himself many times, and lapsed into lengthy silences.
In short, the Air Force is unsympathetic and the American officials in
Mexico are inept political fixtures. It is obvious that we need to find
someone in the government with responsibility and the initiative to help
in situations like this one.
4. The simple fact that cave divers were needed. It is hard enough
to find people who are qualified to make the "standard" cave rescue (i.e.
search a horizontal cave for a lost or injured person and evacuate if
necessary), let alone try to find people qualified to perform a pit
rescue, but when you need cave qualified divers, you narrow the list to
a precious few
Conclusions; (Anderson) The preceding reports are thorough and it is
easy to conclude that the tragedy was caused by inexperience and in-
effectual leadership in the Scout troop. However, some of the tragedy
lies in the fact that there was a group of N.S.S. and grotto affiliated
cavers in the vicinity of the cave at the time of the accident. There
were actually two experienced cavers at the scene of the accident who,
if they had chosen to, could have verbally or physically restrained the
boys to stop their taking their fatal dives. While the presence of this
group of experienced cavers in the vicinity obviously expidited some of
the search and rescue operations, it might also have prevented the accident.
page 12
The

---------- Page 14 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
Puerto Rico, pit near Rosario, six miles east of Mayaguez. On
December 24, 1971, Viola Royer (23) was injured when the rope on which
she was ascending the 50 foot pit, became untied; dropping her 15 feet
where she glanced off a ledge and fell another 10 feet. She, and five
others; all skilled and experienced cavers and N.S.S. and grotto
members, were exploring a 50 foot pit on the summit of a steep jungle-
covered hill. The pit was rigged with half-inch Samson line. Four
people, including Viola, rappelled in, leaving the other two cavers at
the top. About 3.15 pin, Viola ascended the rope first, using a pair
of Jumar ascenders. After a 25 foot free climb, she was unable to get
around the lip of the overhang, and requested assistance. The three
cavers at the botton pulled the free end of the rope downward and away
from the lip with a combined force of about 150 pounds. The robe cause
loose, causing the fall.
Her injuries were determined as a possitle broken elbow. She had
no feeling in her left arm and was therefore unable to operate the
ascenders. An attempt to pull her up the pit using three adults at
the top was abandoned as too risky (one of the people on top was
needed to operate the Jumar safety anchor). Two people went to
Mayaguez for help and returned in 21/2020 hours with six other people,
including an M.D. from nearby ella Vista Hospital. Viola was tied
into the end of the rope and quickly brought to the surface. Dr.
Henning discovered no fracture at that time so the are was not splinted.
She was able to assist herself down the hill.
Source: Paul Boyer
Analysis: (Boyer) The knot used by the person who rigged the rope
was a variation of a hitch on a tight around a tree. Neither the
anchor nor the rope broke. Apparently the hitch was improperly tied,
and the free end pulled through.
(Anderson) The easily tied and easily recognized bowline
would have been a better choice for tying off the rope, and as a routine
safety procedure, the rigging should have been checked by at least one
other knowledgeable person before use.
page 13

---------- Page 15 ----------
American Caving Accidents - 1971
SUMMARY
Situation
General
Vertical
Diving
Immediate Cause
Fall
Falling rock or object
Failure of equipment
Exposure Stunble and/or exhaustion
Burns
Asphyxiation
Illness
Drowning
Contributory causes
Climbing unroped
Caving Exceeding abilities (inexperience)
alone
Inadequate equipment
Bad weather (incl. flooding)
Exposure and/or exhaustion
Loosing way
Light failure
Party too large
Party separated
Getting stuck
Hurry
Poor judgement
Age of individuals
"Boys"
Under 15
"Young, 15-20 or college age"
21-25
26-30
31-35
Over 35
Unknown
Affiliation with Caving Group
Unaffiliated
Not stated
Member of caving group
Estimate of experience
None or little
Moderate
Experienced
Unknown
