
---------- Page 1 ----------
DECEMBER 1990, PART II
American
Caving
Accidents
O

---------- Page 2 ----------
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS - 1990
This publication is only as good as the reports sent. It is probably fair to say that all the facts are never received and that
inaccuracies may be found in these pages. Furthermore, you may find yourself in disagreement with the comments made
regarding a particular incident. There is often no clear conclusion that can be drawn. I offer my opinions and those of others
as a guideline; draw your own conclusions if you like. There is no single set of rules that can define "safe caving" for every
caver. But read on--if you read this publication, your safety awareness will surely increase.
Send any information on any incident to:
Steve Knutson, Editor
American Caving Accidents
41811 S. E. Louden Road
Corbett, OR 97019
The following is a breakdown of incidents for the last five
years by result and cause. It is obviously superficial, but will
allow us to draw some rough conclusions and serve as a guide
to incident types.
1.
RESULT OF INCIDENT
Code-Result
AA-Fatality
A-Injury & Aid
B-Aid (no injury)
C-Injury (no aid)
D-No injury or aid
Total
Total AA,A,B,C
VOLUME 48
December 1990, Part II
NUMBER 13
The NSS News (ISSN-0027-7010) is published by the National Speleological
Society, Inc., Cave Ave., Huntsville, AL 35810. Second class postage paid
at Huntsville, AL and additional offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to National Speleological Society,
Inc., Cave Ave., Huntsville, AL 35810.
Copyright 1990 by the National Speleological Society, Inc.
Front Cover: Handline Falls, Middle Millerton Lake Cave, California. Photo
by Dave Bunnell.
Rear Cover: Skylight Entrance, Basketball Cave, California. Photo by Dave
Bunnell.
Rear Inside Cover: Daniel Longhurst, Deatons Cave near Taylorsville, Georgia. Photo
by Gary Beasley.
Photo Developing: Bill Frantz
Proofreading Assistance: Peri Frantz
Production Assistance: Bob Richardson
2.
CAUSE OF INCIDENT
Code-Cause
a-Acetylene Explosion
b-Bad Air
c-Caver Fall
d-Drowning
e-Equipment Failure
f-Flood
h-Hypothermic
i-Illness
1-Losing the Way
r-Rockfall
s-Stuck
x-Exhaustion
o-Other
3.
SCUBA
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED:
Bo
Berry Creek Cave
TX
3-21-87
De
Pregame Pit
AL
2-12-89
Beh
Mystery Hole
TN
9-23-89
Ce
Unnamed Pit
TN
Fall 1989
Cie
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
12-29-89
1990 INCIDENTS:
Be
Chapel Cave
AL
1-7
Dr
Tuskarora Cave
KS
1-10 B
AAi
Center-of-the-Earth
HA
1-10 A
Co
Big Manhole Cave
NM
1-14 A
Bc
Unnamed Cave
HA
1-14 B
Co
Mystery Cave
MO
1-21
Ae
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
2-18

---------- Page 3 ----------
AAc
Wolff Cave
AL
2-15
Be
Sloan's Valley Cave
KY
February A
Ac
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
February B
Ac
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
February C
Ac
King Blair
IN
3-3
Co
Lechuguilla Cave
NM
March
Cc
Brier Cave
FL
3-11
Ac
John Brown's Cave
WV
3-15
Ace
Huccacove Cave
CO
3-25
Be
Bear Cave
PA
4-8
AAr
Lent Cave
IN
4-29
Be
Johnson's Cave
TN
May A
Co
The Sinkhole
TN
May B
Ar
Unspecified Cave
TX
5-13
Ac
Laurel Caverns
PA
5-26 A
Do
Beard's Cave
AR
5-26 B
Ac
Devil's Kitchen Cave
WV
5-27 A
Be
Bowden Cave
WV
5-27 B
Cr
Stephens Gap Cave
AL
6-9
Be
New Trout Cave
WV
6-18
Bo
Kennamer Cave
AL
June A
Cr
Elwood's Drop
IA
June B
Ac
Ape Cave
WA
6-24
Db
Jack Spring Cave
KS
Summer A
Ace
Antonia Pit
MO
Summer B
Cre
Bigfoot Cave
CA
July
Bl
Buckner's Cave
IN
7-8
Co
McFail's Cave
NY
7-21
Be
Johnson's Cave
TN
7-22
Bse
Cave Disappointment
NY
7-28
Be
Unnamed Cave
VA
8-2
Br
Rotorhead Cave
WY
8-11
Bc
Tres Charros Cave
WY
8-12
Cc
Organ Cave
WV
Fall A
De
Pherris Pit
TN
Fall B
Ac
Spanish Cave
CO
9-1
Bs
Bee Tree Cave
IN
9-16
Ble
Nickwackett Cave
VT
9-29
Dr
Apogee Cave
CA
10-8
Br
Sunbeam Cave
CA
10-13
Ar
Trapdoor Cave
IN
10-14
Aec
Hole-to-Hell
ID
10-26
Ac
Onyx
AZ
11-10 A
Bl
Bone/Norman Cave
WV
11-10 B
Ac
Ladd's Mt. Cave
GA
11-18
Bf
Onesquethaw Cave
NY
12-1
Be
Natural Well
AL
12-6
AAc
Bullis Hole
TX
12-13
Alce
Agua Caliente Cave
AZ
12-31
DIVING:
AAd
Peacock Spring
FL
4-9
AAd
Troy Spring
FL
4-14
AAd
Diepolder Sink #2
FL
5-11
AAd
Otter Spring
FL
5-19
AAd
Eagle's Nest Sink
FL
August
AAd
Devil's Den
FL
10-7
AAd
Sac Actun, Mexico MX
10-17
AAd
Peacock Spring
FL
11-4
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS - 1990
The total of consequential incidents, Codes AA, A, B, and C
are 51 for 1990, in keeping with a small and gradual increase
over the last 5 years. As in previous years, three causes were
dominant, caver fall (19 incidents), equipment failure (17
incidents) and rockfall (11 incidents). Most of these were not
"acts-of-God" and were, presumably, preventable. Let's go
through the causes in alphabetical order and make some
comments:
a) Acetylene Explosions - There were none, due possibly to a
gradual change by many cavers from carbide to electric light.
b) Bad Air - The only incident was Summer A, where
petroleum fumes were apparently brought into the cave from an
oil field by bad weather. Might one expect more of this in
coming years?
c) Caver Fall - These ranged from stepping in a hole and
falling over (6-24) to an 80 foot non-rappel (Summer B).
Injuries were numerous: death (2-25), broken neck vertebrae
(3-11), broken pelvis and vertebrae (3-15), arm rappel yielding
a broken ankle and lower leg (3-25), broken legs (5-26 A, 5-27
A, 6-24), arm (11-10 A), foot (11-18), and broken ankles
(Summer B). Several of these should have been belayed. Three
(2-18, Summer B, and 3-25) were out-of-control rappels. One
rappeller unclipped to untangle the rope and fell 80 feet to his
death (12-13). A thwarted through-trip and lack of ascenders
led to a hand-over-hand ascent and fall (12-31). The only
broken rope was hemp (10-26).
d) Drowning - None.
e) Equipment Failure - The second leading cause: a lack of
ascending gear (1-7, February A, 7-22, 7-28, and 12-31) with

---------- Page 4 ----------
two of those due to a thwarted crossover, a lack of a helmet
(July), stolen rope (May A), insufficient friction on a rappel
device (2-18), out-of-control arm rappel due to lack of rappel
device (3-25), flashlights only (4-8 and 5-27 B), and light
failure using carbide (6-18). There was a rope abrasion using
a frog system (Fall B), and webbing jammed in a chest roller
(12-6). It appears that there are fewer (?) flashlight caver light
failures than before, and more technical equipment failures.
There was also a good example of what happens to a solo caver
who suffers light failure (8-2).
f) Flood - There was only one, in clear weather, due to a
broken beaver dam that may, in fact, have been vandalized by
humans (12-1). The number of sudden storms may determine
the number of flooding incidents but it is nice to think that just
possibly we are staying out of bad caves on rainy days.
h) Hypothermia - No incidents revolved around hypothermia.
i) Illness - Only one, a cardiac arrest and death of a caver lost
briefly in a hot cave (1-10 B).
1) Lost - There actually were 3 or 4 strandings due, apparently,
mainly to disorientation (7-8, 9-29, 11-10 B, and 12-31).
o) Other - Always an entertaining category - can you believe
bashing your own knee with a sledge (1-14 A), eating carbide
(1-21), catching your penis in your carabiner (March), being
shocked by lightening inside a cave (5-26 B), rappelling to a
snake on a ledge (June A), and being sliced by knife-blade
rocks (7-21)?
r) Rockfall - Probably the worst hazard in caving since it is
never entirely preventable. There were several that came close
to being a Floyd Collins repeat, with rockfall or shifting rock
in a crawlway (1-10 A, 8-11, 10-8, 10-13 and 10-14). One did
result in a fatality (4-29). There were the usual falling rocks
(6-9, June B, and July) as well as an overhanging tree dropping
a limb on ascending cavers (May B).
s) Stuck - Only one of this potentially deadly predicament, a
caver caught by his belt buckle (9-16).
t) Trapped - A solo caver was stranded for loss of light (8-2).
x) Exhaustion - None.
It is easy to conclude that exposed climbs should be belayed
or handlined, one should never rappel without ascending gear,
and that one can never be too careful around loose rocks.
Rappelling can be dangerous, especially if you use unfamiliar
techniques. It must be said that a brake or second point of
attachment to the rope while rappelling would have prevented
the 2-18 incident and, perhaps, the 12-13 incident as well.
Several incidents were made much worse by failure to leave a
good record of the participants' intentions. American caving
rope continues to be used without failure. Fatalities also
continue to be moderate in actual cave exploration, with one
due to rock movement in a crawlway (4-29) and one from
rappelling (12-13).
The following incident was reprinted in the Loyal Hanna
Troglodyte, Spring, 1990, p. 35:
"On Thursday last, two young gentlemen, J. Herron and a
friend by the name of Anderson, entered Bear Cave, near
Hillside, for the purpose of exploring it. Not returning, their
friends on Friday morning organized for a search, under the
lead of George Rhey, Esq. The party entered the cave at 9
a.m., and in two hours thereafter found them in an exhausted
condition, having given up all hope of rescue. Their light
having given out, they were unable to find their way back.
Their rescuers deserve their lasting gratitude for the timely
assistance rendered."
This refers to Bear Cave, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania. No, it is not from this year, or even this
lifetime--it occurred October 21, 1875, 115 years ago. Yet it
reads just like a contemporary account of lost cavers--in fact,
see 4-8-90 of this issue for a similar incident in the same cave.
Why do people continue to enter a lightless environment
without backup light sources?? Is there some compulsion?
Surely anyone can see that a light failure in a cave will leave
you stranded. Why do we do it? Can education prevent this
sort of compulsive risk-taking?
ARE WE DOOMED?
Can the public, or cavers, be educated into safe caving?
Perhaps there is an answer in the results of such educational
efforts by the cave diving community.
Some years ago, the National Speleological Society gave
sanction to the obviously dangerous sport of cave diving by
chartering the NSS Cave Diving Section. This group, along
with the National Association for Cave Diving led to the
establishment of a set of safety rules and certification through
training and the result, for a period of time, was that only
untrained, uncertified cave divers (that is, ones drifting into
cave diving from the diving community) were involved in fatal
incidents. The certified cave divers, meanwhile, strived to warn
the others of the dangers by, for instance, getting regulations in
place at some popular sites. Moreover, the NACD and CDS
preached their lifesaving rules.
Results in very recent years are interesting. The rate of death
among non-certified cave divers has decreased. Now we are
experiencing fatalities from certified cave divers. There are
four (5-11, August, 10-17, and 11-4) reported in this issue.
So what has gone wrong? Perhaps there is an answer in
another parallel. Years ago, when I was learning to blast, to

---------- Page 5 ----------
use explosives, I was impressed by what the Blaster's Handbook
(DuPont Company, Wilmington, Delaware) had to say about the
similarly hazardous activity of blasting. I now quote from page
410 of the 16th Edition (1977).
"Personnel designated to handle explosive materials should
have intelligence and common sense and be trained in the use
of explosives.
A small minority, however, will never have the proper
attitude to become safe and efficient blasters, no matter how
much they are trained or how well they learn the technical
aspects of blasting.
Men who, through ignorance, carelessness, or bravado,
follow unsafe practices constitute the greatest problem to
blasting safety. If a man is careless, reckless, or unwilling to
mend his ways, he should be removed from all contact with
explosives.
Very w blasting accidents are caused by lack of knowledge
or experience. They are more frequently the result of a mental
attitude that does not put safety before every other
consideration."
It appears that there are some who simply should never
become blasters--those who cannot resist impulses to show off,
to improvise, to cut corners, to shortcut safety rules. In short,
they would not, indeed, could not in the long run, follow a set
of safety rules and would be a danger to themselves and others.
Cave diving is a very similar activity--where one must be
ever aware and calculate every move. Some people, the
egotistical or impulsive or improvising types are simply
psychologically ill-equipped and, it appears to me, should not
be certified. I believe that the cave diving community must find
some way to turn away such people, to fail trainees who show
such traits, if it wants to return to a clean safety record.
Perhaps it is too late for this. such screening may not
be
possible. In any case, the training obviously must include
attitude conditioning.
I guess what I am trying to get at is that you can set up
educational programs, but you will invariably educate some
people to their deaths. Should this deter the educational efforts?
I think not; I think the good will outweigh the bad.
ARE WE READY FOR THIS?
I began caving many years ago and at that time was also
heavily involved in rock climbing. As with caving, the sport
of climbing was then far outside general public acceptance and
your companions seemed always to be unusual and interesting
people. The sport was dangerous, psychologically difficult to
get into, often led to physical and elemental hardship. It
was also pure--you climbed only for the personal challenge.
Climbers did not particularly care what they looked like, but
mainly cared that their garb and equipment were functional.
I left climbing after a few years and concentrated on caving,
an activity also dangerous, and with even greater psychological
barriers than climbing. Besides the fear of height, one had to
overcome whatever fear they had of the dark, the closeness, and
of whatever gristly wildlife was lurking just beyond the
dwindling entrance light.
Now I look at rock climbing and am amazed, dismayed: skin
tight suits in designer patterns, cute little shoes, color matched
to the suit and helmet, courses in climbing at schools and
community centers, artificial climbing walls in gyms and even
in individuals' garages, routes on big walls (like Half Dome in
Yosemite National Park) fixed with protection, "top-roping" to
eliminate the danger, and even televised rock-climbing
competition. I am amazed--rock climbing has become popular.
So now I realize that it will happen to caving. The wheels
may already be in motion for the final revolution, and my
personal prediction is that we'll know that caving has arrived
when a complete caving outfit is available at your local sporting
goods/adventure store. and I don't think this is far off.
Already we see commercials on TV featuring caving and the
publicity from the Lechuguilla Project alone has been extra-
ordinary. The Mobley rescue was grossly over publicized, but
perhaps this tells us something about the news media's readiness
to feature caving. When the news media decides you are
interesting, there is no putting them off.
I don't want this to happen, but I feel it will. I urge us to be
ready perhaps, since we are now enticing the public with the
glory of caving, as in the massive publicity accrued by the
Lechuguilla Project, we should go public with the techniques
we have evolved over so many years, the means to survive, so
to speak.
we can have influence and good effect if we
educate, but will be bypassed if we don't.
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED
BERRY CREEK CAVE, TX


********** March 21, 1987
Bo - Aid, Other
On March 21, 1987, a group of cavers entered Berry Creek
Cave in Williamson County, Texas. One caver (29) had just
entered total darkness, about 40 feet from, and 20 feet below
the entrance when he was stung on the inner side of his left
arm, near the elbow, by a scorpion, Vaejovis reddelli. "The
initial response was a sharp, burning pain, beginning like a fire
ant bite but then becoming like red-hot pins sticking into the
area." A half hour later, a 2-inch area around the sting was red
and swollen. The shoulder, elbow and wrist joints began to
ache. This continued for two days with the elbow pain the
most severe. Seven hours after the sting, the area around it
developed a bruise-like appearance; ten hours later the biceps
muscle ached and was sensitive to the touch. On the second
day, itching set in and lasted for 1-1/2 days. After a week, the

---------- Page 6 ----------
swelling was gone but the redness continued; in the second
week, it changed to pale purple and there was "a small amount
of exfoliation that lasted a few days".
REFERENCE: James Reddell, "Cave Scorpion Sting", The
Texas Caver, August, 1988.
COMMENTS: The victim weighed 160 pounds and was in
good health; he had been stung by the scorpion Centruroides
vittatus in the past with no reaction so he was apparently was
not allergic to such stings. An allergic person should be careful
to avoid stings.
PREGAME PIT, AL


********** February 12, 1989
Beh - Aid, Equipment Failure, Hypothermia
On February 12, three cavers prepared to explore a virgin 57-
foot pit in Madison County, Alabama. Only one was
experienced in vertical caving. The pit was rigged and the
experienced caver descended. A second caver started down, but
had long hair which caught in his rack. He quickly attached a
safety Jumar above the rack but was unable to free his hair.
The man on the bottom called to have the rest of the 150-foot
rope lowered so he could climb to the stranded caver to assist.
Meanwhile, the caver on rope found a foothold and was able to
clear his rack and the trip continued without further incident.
REFERENCE: Gary Griner, Personal Communication,
undated, 1 page.
MYSTERY HOLE, TN


********** September 23, 1989
Beh - Aid, Equipment Failure, Hypothermia
On September 23, a group of three went to Lookout
Mountain to explore Mystery Hole, Hamilton County,
Tennessee. This thousand foot cave has a freefall entrance pit
with a stream cascading down unless a dam spillway is closed
with a plug. They rigged a two hundred feet of rope, of
necessity, in the full force of the falls. Chuck Rollins (19),
wearing shorts and a tee-shirt, without a helmet and with a
flashlight for light, rappelled in only to reach the end, still
about a hundred feet above the floor. He was unable to do a
change-over and ascend, so his companions went for help.
Rollins was left hanging in the falls.
At 4 p.m. the Hamilton County Emergency Operations
Center mobilized the County Cave Rescue team. As soon as
they arrived, they rigged a lowering system on the rope in
place, using a second rope, and another rope was rigged for
rappelling the pit. Rollins was then lowered to the bottom,
after having been in the waterfall for about two hours. The
water, flowing into the pit was shut off and two rescuers
descended to attend to the victim.
Rollins was wrapped in a wool blanket and Epteh Heat Packs
were applied to his chest and hands while a tarp tent was
fashioned over him. This was then heated with a Petzl carbide
lamp. Two more rescuers descended with dry thermal
underwear and medical supplies. Rollins' temperature was 94.2
degrees. The thermal underwear was put on him; he was re-
wrapped in the blanket and placed in the tent. Coffee was
brought down--Rollins temperature had come up to 98 degrees.
He drank the coffee and was walked around. At that time it
was decided that he appeared OK to climb. The dam was
opened a bit to drain the pool behind it. After closing the dam,
Rollins was equipped with a helmet and ascending system and
was tandemed up with a rescuer above and another alongside on
the second rope. The climb took 15 to 20 minutes.
REFERENCE: Buddy Lane, "Rescue in Mystery Hole",
Speleonews, October 1989, p. 168.
COMMENTS: Rollins had never been in a cave, but was a
rock climber. He believed if the rope did not reach, there
would be a ledge on which to change over to ascend. He had
a second rope to tie onto the end of the first, but free-hanging
was unable to do so. At least he admitted, "I was stupid".
UNNAMED PIT, TN
Fall, 1989
Ce - Injury, Equipment Failure
A resident of Cookeville discovered a 65-foot pit near the
Winona Motel in Putnam County, Tennessee. He managed to
descend this shaft on a knotted rope, hand-over-hand, but could
not get back up. He was hauled out by the Putnam County
Rescue Squad a short time later.
REFERENCE: Richard Finch, "Intrepid Adventurer Descends
Six Hundred Foot Pit Hand Over Hand!", Speleonews
Nashville, Chattanooga and Upper Cumberland Grottos, NSS),
December 1989, p. 202-3.
LECHUGUILLA CAVE, NM


********** December 29, 1989
Cie - Injury, Illness, Equipment Failure
On Tuesday, December 26, at 11 a.m., a group of three (part
of a larger expedition) entered Lechuguilla Cave in the
Guadalupe Mountains, New Mexico. Their objective was the
Far Eastern part of the cave. They carried packs with gear for
a 3-day camp in the cave. Shari Lydy (37) was wearing a pair
of relatively-new boots (Hi-Tec canvas-upper). These had been
used on several short cave trips, a hike around Slaughter
Canyon on the 22nd, and a moderate-length trip into
Lechuguilla on December 23-24. On the 25th there was "minor
abrasion" evident on her left heel and two toes, so she carried
Bacitracin cream, moleskin, and Spenco "second skin" on the 3-
day trip in case something worse developed. Furthermore, she
taped her toes and heel before entering the cave.
On Wednesday evening she observed blisters on her

---------- Page 7 ----------
previously abraided toes and a new abrasion on her right foot.
By Thursday evening the blisters on the left foot had broken
and were oozing and painful with some swelling. The foot
"smelled like something rotting". Bacitracin caused intense
burning and throbbing for 2 hours.
On Friday they started the trip out. With her boots on, the
left foot was very painful. Once she started walking, the pain
dissipated, but 2 hours later, at the top of the Aragonitemare,
the pain returned intensely. She took two Tylenol tablets but
was limping badly.
At the bottom of Apricot Pit, her left foot was numb. Her
toes were very painful and halfway up became agonizingly so.
She abandoned her pack to be carried out by her companions
and other cavers. She was able to make her way out slowly.
Back at the field house, both feet and ankles were swollen
and several toes were "mushy". She was later diagnosed to
have cellulitis and put on antibiotics.
REFERENCE: Shari Lydy, "NSS Accident Report Form",
undated, 2 pages.
COMMENTS: Lydy says that the boots had rubber liners and
thus did not "breathe". She had only one pair of socks and
these, as a result, were always damp and dirty.
1990 ACCIDENTS
CHAPEL CAVE, AL
January 7
Be - Lack of Equipment
At 6 a.m. on Sunday, January 7, a group of six cavers
entered Chapel Cave, Morgan County, Alabama. These were
Bill Campbell (18), Bill Consuela (20), Denny Hamilton (19),
Al Marks (20), and Allen Grant (23). It was a winter's day in
Alabama, with steady rain and a 38-degree F temperature.
The main Chapel Entrance to the cave is in a small sink with
a tributary stream gully from higher on the mountain. The
other, Wildcat Entrance, is prone to flooding. At the entrance
is a short, overhung drop that conducts the gully stream; 50 feet
into the cave is a 60-foot pit leading to the main part of the
cave. The cavers had only three seat harnesses and one set of
Gibbs ascenders; their upper bodies were insulated only by T-
shirts and they had no hardhats.
The cavers successfully reached the main part of the cave.
When they tried to exit, they found they could not get back up
the 60-foot drop. They had left word with their families that
they were going either to Maubry or Chapel Cave and at 8 p.m.
they were reported overdue to authorities. At 9 p.m. caver
rescuers were mobilized and, after checking the Maubry Cave
entrance for the victims' vehicle, they located the six at the
bottom of the 60-foot pit in Chapel. The six were assisted up
the pit and out, the operation being completed at 1 a.m.,
Monday, January 8.
REFERENCE: 1) Ed. "Six Men Rescued from Area Cave",
The Huntsville Times, January 8, 1990, p. 2B.
2) Greg Freese, Accident Report, unpublished, undated.
3) Bill Vamedoe, "Chapel Cave Rescue", Accident Report,
unpublished, undated.
COMMENTS: The cavers in question "were aware of the NSS
and the Huntsville Grotto and had been on a horizontal trip, but
they said that they preferred not to cave with the grotto because
the grotto required hardhats(!)." Needless(?) to say, they were
grossly underequipped and are lucky there were not more
serious consequences.
TUSKARORA CAVE, KS
January 10A
Dr Rockfall
On Wednesday, January 10, James Potts and companions
were mapping in Tuskarora Cave, Bourbon County, Kansas.
While exiting the cave, Potts was in a crawlway when a large
rock fell from the wall, landing "right in front of my nose".
This blocked the passage sufficiently that he had to roll it down
the passage until it fell into a hole.
REFERENCE: James Potts, in "Trip Reports", The Kansas
Kaver, May 1990, Vol. 7, p. 9.
CENTER-OF-THE-EARTH, HA
January 10B
AAi Illness
On Wednesday, January 10, a group of three people entered
a lava cave near Route 137 in Opihikao in the Puna District,
Hilo, Hawaii. These were Rodney Armour (55), his wife, Jo,
and Mauve Fisher. The entrance is in a sink about 11 feet
deep; an initial, short, descending, body-sized tube or
constriction leads to a stoop-way that continues descending as
it enlarges to a walkway. The cave has numerous small side
leads and is described as being "as large as a city block". With
hot water pools and a temperature of 96 degrees F, the cave is
locally popular as a natural sauna.
The trio explored for a bit, and at some point Rodney
Armour became separated from the other two. Fisher and Jo
Armour exited the cave and at 2:30 p.m. reported Rodney
missing. Rescuers soon found the missing caver but he was
dead, lying in a very narrow passage. The heat forced rescuers
to work in 20-minute shifts, but since the cave was not large,
the body was removed by 4:15 p.m. An autopsy later revealed
death to be due to cardiac arrest.
REFERENCES:
1) Rod Thompson, "Washington State Visitor Dies in Big Isle
Lava Tube," Star Bulletin, January 11, 1990.
2) Ed., "Tourist Dies in Lava Tube", Ibid., January 11, 1990,

---------- Page 8 ----------
p. 12) Chris Reed, "Puna Police Look to Block Entrance to
Cave after Death of Tourist", Hawaii Tribune-Herald, January
12, 1990.
3) Chris Reed, "puna Police Look to Block Entrance to Cave
after Death of Tourist", Hawaii Tribune-Herald, January 12,
1990.
4) D. Hunter Bishop, "6 Feet Under in Opihikao", Ibid.,
January 24, 1990, p. 1.
5) Frank Reid, "Death in Hawaiian Lava-Tube Cave",
Computer Bulletin Board, January 12, 1990.
COMMENTS: The group was apparently using flashlights and
had no real caving equipment. The Armours were visiting a
nearby retreat. The cardiac arrest may have been caused by
panic when Armour found himself alone--parties should stay
together.
UNNAMED CAVE, HA
January 14
Be - Equipment Failure
On Sunday, January 14, William Goidell was attending a
party with friends near Hawaii Volcanoes National Park in
Hawaii. Late in the evening, they decided to experience a
natural sauna at a steam vent area on some bluffs about a mile
downslope from park headquarters. "Goidell was unfamiliar
with the steam vent area. After removing his clothes, the man
walked into a steam cloud and disappeared."
Goidell stepped into an unseen fissure in the lava, landing on
a ledge 25 feet down. He called for help and a rescue attempt
was made by his friends, using a rope made of towels knotted
together. This didn't work, so they sought help at nearby
Kilauea Military Camp. Park rangers were notified and hauled
Goidell out of the hole at about 2 a.m. (two hours after he fell
in), using conventional nylon rope and body harness.
REFERENCE: Hugh Clark, "Visitor Lands in Deep Trouble
at Geothermal Sauna Soiree", The Honolulu Advertiser,
January 19, 1990, p. A-4.
MYSTERY CAVE, MO
January 21
Co - Other
On a trip into Mystery Cave, Missouri, January 21, 1990,
Aaron Addison and companions proceeded to the Coon Room
via a 600 foot crawlway. They stopped there to have a bite to
eat and take photos. Addison took his baby bottle of candy,
rattled it, opened it, and tossed down a mouthful. The bad
news was that it was his carbide bottle; the good news was that
he was able to spit it out and suffer only minor burns. He
suggests keeping food and carbide in different style containers.
REFERENCE: Aaron Addison, "Tale of Two Baby Bottles,"
The Crawlway Courier, 24(1) Spring, 1990, p. 5-6.
LECHUGUILLA CAVE, NM
February 18
Ae - Equipment Failure
On February 18, Neil Bakstrom, Dave Belski and Bill Heath
planned to enter Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico for a 5-day
stay as part of the Microclimatology Study Project. Bakstrom's
vertical gear had recently been stolen so he had borrowed gear
from the Park Service. Instead of a rack, he chose a "French
Carabiner rig" which apparently used a single carabiner for
braking friction. He reasoned that the pits he would encounter
were relatively short.
At the 70-foot entrance pit a new rope had been rigged.
Belski and Heath descended. When Bakstrom rappelled, he
quickly went out of control, lacking friction from his rappel
device, and hit bottom at "near freefall speed", injuring his
right ankle.
The ankle was taped to help immobilize it and Belski
ascended to give assistance when Bakstrom reached the lip.
Using a single-foot Texas rig, Bakstrom was able to climb out.
With aid from Belski and Heath, he hopped the mile to the
vehicles. At a hospital, the ankle was diagnosed as fractured;
he also suffered a 6-inch-square rope burn on his left thigh.
REFERENCES:
1) Bill Heath, Accident Report, "Windy Passages," (Pajarito
Grotto, NSS) 3 (3) March 1990, p. 22.
2) Dan Clardy, Personal Communication.
COMMENTS: Bakstrom is reportedly "an extremely
competent climber and caver". Still, to save a few ounces, he
chose an unfamiliar device over a rack. Bad choice. My usual
advice in a situation like this is to test the friction braking you
are getting at the lip, but it may be better to refrain from using
an unfamiliar device until you get a chance to practice with it.
WOLFF CAVE, AL
February 25
AAc - Caver Fall
On February 25, a group of four people were exploring
around the vertical entrance to Wolff Cave, Morgan County,
Alabama. The cave is near the residence of two of these
people. A small stream cascades over the cliff above the
entrance. At 2:15 p.m., one of the group, Scott Holmes (17),
decided to climb behind the waterfall on a ledge. He lost his
footing and fell some 45 feet into the entrance pit. The
authorities were notified and rescuers soon arrived and found
Holmes dead from head injuries. The body was evacuated in 3-
1/2 hours using two haul systems.
REFERENCES:
1) Greg Freese, Accident Report, undated.
2) Ed., "Union Hill Youth Falls to His Death," The Decatur
Daily, February 26, 1990.

---------- Page 9 ----------
3) Greg Freese, "Fatality in Entrance of Wolff's Cave,"
Huntsville Grotto News, March 1990, p. 12.
SLOAN'S VALLEY CAVE, KY
February A
Be - Attempted Crossover, Lack of Gear
In February, a group of 20 students from Ohio University
entered the Screaming Willies entrance of Sloan's Valley Cave
in Pulaski County, Kentucky. They intended to do a crossover
trip, coming out an entrance that did not require a rope ascent.
They thus did not take ascending gear; furthermore, some were
without helmets and lights. Earlier, they had encountered other
cavers at Sloan's and had been told that water levels were above
normal and that their proposed trip may not be possible.
When they were unable to get to the other entrance, they
returned to Screaming Willier where they were hauled out by
other cavers using a pulley system.
REFERENCE: Bob Wright, Cave Cricket Gazette, April
1990.
LECHUGUILLA CAVE, NM
February B
Ac - Caver Fall
On a February expedition to the National Park Service's
Lechuguilla Cave in the Guadalupe Mountains of southern New
Mexico, a group of cavers was heading into the cave. After one
hour's travel, they came to an exposed traverse that was
equipped with a handline for safety. The experienced members
of the party proceeded across without actually clipping in.
Clinton Cline, on his first trip in this cave, started across in
similar fashion, but lost his footing partway and was unable to
hold onto the rope. He fell twenty feet, landing on a ledge that
saved him a further 60 foot drop, and suffered three broken
ribs. He was able to retreat from the trip under his own power,
including a 150-foot, free-drop ascent.
REFERENCE: Garry Petrie, Personal Communication,
September 6, 1991.
COMMENTS: A handline is just what an exposed traverse
such as this needs. It only takes a second to clip in--to not do
so is silly. The experienced cavers obviously knew the traverse
and felt little danger of falling. They should,however, have
urged the "new guy" to clip in; you just don't know what
another caver might find difficult. and it
could
save
you
having to spend your trip hauling someone out.
LECHUGUILLA CAVE, NM
February C
Ac - Caver Fall
On a February expedition to Lechuguilla Cave in New
Mexico, a group was proceeding into the cave. About ten
minutes in, they came to a flowstone-slope descent. This was
fixed with a handline and John McLean went down first,
carrying a 40 pound pack. At the bottom of the handline, the
slope continued for a short distance as a 30 degree slope.
McLean started down but slipped. He broke his fall with one
arm and suffered a dislocated shoulder. McLean had this
happen before, so he was able to relocate the joint by the time
the rest of his party came to his aid. He aborted the trip and
proceeded out without further incident.
REFERENCE:
Gary Petrie, Personal Communication,
October 6, 1991.
KING BLAIR CAVE, IN
March 3
Ac - Caver Fall
At about 11:30 a.m. on Sunday, March 3, a group of three
cavers, including Aaron Howell (20), and Jeff Schepper, entered
King Blair Cave, about eight miles southwest of Bloomington,
Indiana. They proceeded to a point about 1300 feet from the
entrance where King Blair connects with Brinegar's Cave. At
this point, at about 2:30 p.m., Howell was climbing a vertical
pitch when he slipped and fell about 30 feet, landing on a
narrow ledge with 40 foot drops on either side. He suffered
multiple lacerations, fractured ribs and was unconscious for ten
minutes. His companions went for help after giving what first
aid they could.
At about 10:30 p.m. paramedics reached the victim and
placed him in a SKED for transport through the cave. A large
group of rescuers worked in teams to move the victim to the
entrance, negotiating vertical pitches and narrow, low passages,
including the Bathtubs, a 2-1/2 foot high passage with two feet
of water. At times, a "human highway" was formed with
rescuers lying down and passing the victim along over them.
One point had to be enlarged with chisel and hammer. The
victim suffered a bit from dehydration and hypothermia, but
reached the entrance at about 6:30 a.m. Monday.
REFERENCES:
1) Will Ott, NSS Accident Report, undated, 9 pps.
2) Bill Pittman, "Rescuers Free Spelunker," The Indianapolis
News, March 5, 1990, p. 1, A-12.
3) Stephen Beaven, "Rescuers Reach Man Trapped in Cave,"
The Herald-Times, March 5, 1990.
4) Julie Creek, "Man Rescued From Cave," Ibid., March 6,
1990.
5) Anne Kibbler, "DeGroote: Rescue Points to Need for
Special Team," Ibid.
COMMENTS: The cavers were said to be experienced and it
may be that they did what any other caver would have done or
have to do to traverse the cave, but the incident seems to point
out the need for some sort of aid at that point in the cave--a
fixed handline or whatever. In any case, to do an exposed
climb without a belay, where a fall could mean injury or death,

---------- Page 10 ----------
with so much difficult passage between the caver and the
entrance seems a bit unjustifiable.
LECHUGUILLA CAVE, NM
March
Co Other
In Lechuguilla Cave there were some incidents resulting from
the use of shorts to combat the warm cave environment. On a
photo trip, one caver was carrying a pack which was tethered
below him on a sling to a non-locking carabiner.
Unfortunately, once while rappelling and once while ascending,
the carabiner opened and caught his penis. There was no
permanent damage.
Similarly, Neil Mestler was ascending and caught his penis
in his lower ascender.
Thomas Zanes was using a Mitchell rig, with the lower
Jumar controlled by a bungi cord. This ascender sometimes
caught his leg, but this only resulted in bruises.
REFERENCE: Dan Clardy, Personal Communication, July,
1990.
COMMENTS: The ascender problems might be solved using
one with the opening on the opposite side, or wear a jock strap.
BRIER CAVE, FL
March 11
Cc - Caver Fall
On March 11, a group of cavers entered Brier Cave in north-
central Florida. This was a trip to show the cave to visiting
dignitaries of the National Speleological Society. Evelyn
Bradshaw, one of the group, had seen slides of the cave and
decided to limit her activities to the entrance area.
The entrance to the cave is a 12-foot climb-down with a
cement cap and a cement door, set in manhole style. The trip
leader described the climb-down and descended. Bradshaw
misunderstood and went in headfirst. Seeing the descent, she
stopped but couldn't back up. Communication was made with
the trip leader. He apparently did not understand her incorrect
orientation. Hoping for the best, she let herself slide forward.
In an instant, she fell, striking her head on the opposite wall.
At the bottom, she soon discovered that the only result seemed
to be a sore head and neck--apparently her hard hat had been
jammed back on her head SO that the back edge struck her neck.
She continued a short way on, then exited with no difficulty.
The head and neck pain was gone after two weeks, but neck
stiffness continued. Two months after the incident, the neck
was x-rayed, revealing a fracture of the second vertebrae. A
neck brace was worn for three months.
REFERENCE: Evelyn Bradshaw, Accident Report, August
3, 1990, 2 pages.
COMMENTS: Bradshaw admits having made a poor decision
to continue rather than having someone behind her help her
retreat from the headfirst position. Still, it is human nature to
try to make the best of a bad situation and carry on even when
we realize we've made a bad decision. She also points out that
a helmet more firmly held in position might have caused her
head to "whiplash", yielding a similar result. In any case,
injuries of this sort can easily be much more serious.
JOHN BROWN'S CAVE, WV
March 15
Ac - Caver Fall
At about 6:30 p.m. on March 15, Mark Wetzel, Tim Jordan,
and David Walker (Jordan's son), entered John Brown's Cave
in West Virginia and spotted a ledge climb that led to a
chimney-climb lead. After touring the cave, they stopped while
Jordan attempted the previously encountered ledge climb.
Wetzel promised he would follow if it went anywhere.
Jordan got 25 feet up, at which point he lost his holds and
fell, head-first, onto a slope, down which he tumbled. Wetzel
immediately sent Walker for the trauma box and bag (outside in
the van). Jordan seemed to be in reasonably good condition,
and after Wetzel placed a cervical collar on the victim's neck,
Jordan made it out with minimal assistance. At the entrance
where they had to pass a steel plate with a 1-1.5 foot gap, they
rolled Jordan onto his side and pulled him out. At Jefferson
Memorial Hospital, it was determined that he had broken his
pelvis and a piece off a lumbar vertebrae.
REFERENCE: Mark Wetzel, "Trip Report - John Brown's
Cave," The West Virginia Caver, 8 (4) August, 1990, p.6.
COMMENTS: If you can't take the fall without very low
probability of injury, use a belay! Still, it is always nice to
hear about a self-rescue and this one must have been painful.
HUCCACOVE CAVE, CO
March 25
Ace - Broken Ankle on Rappel
On Sunday, March 25, Jon Barker, Kevin Smith, Steve
Smith, Ben Evans, Leigh Evans, and Jeff Fowler entered
Huccacove Cave, near Cave of the Winds, near Manitou
Springs, Colorado. Their objective was a photography session
in the newly-discovered Mammoth Extension.
They had consulted cavers experienced with the route and
were advised to expect tight crawls and climbs where an
ascender would be handy on handlines. As a result, they
brought only one figure-8 for descent.
Just after noon, they arrived at the top of the Overlook drop,
leading from Hucky's Secret to God's Country. The descent
involves 20 feet of steep slope to an overhanging 15-foot pitch.
Barker and Leigh Evans used Barker's figure-8 while the other
four opted to apply "arm rappels" where the rope goes around
behind the back, and under each armpit with one wrap around
each arm. Three cavers descended using this technique

---------- Page 11 ----------
successfully; however, when Steve Smith came down, he
slipped the rope too much at the over-hang and lost his balance.
Since the rappel was done angled to one side, he then
pendulumed ten feet, striking a wall. He was able to get his
feet ahead of him, but struck with his right heel hitting the wall
first. (The force of this broke his ankle and the end of the
tibia and fibula in the lower leg.)
Smith completed the rappel and was diagnosed as having a
severe sprain in his very painful right ankle. Another caving
group was working on a dig nearby and one caver was enlisted
to help. The ankle was splinted with two Jumars and some
survey tape. Smith and two companions then started out of the
cave, the victim moving slowly under his own power. The rest
would follow as a second group. Smith made it the thousand
feet to the entrance and down the gully to the Williams Canyon
Road, where a ride was obtained in a passing car. At a hospital
later it was determined that the ankle was broken as were the
ends of the tibia and fibula in the lower leg. The ankle
received an operation and a complete recovery is expected.
REFERENCE: Kevin and Steve Smith, "Steve 0, Wall 1
Rocky Mountain Caving, Spring, 1990, p. 9.
COMMENTS: Mountaineers developed the arm rappel for
descents down a slope. I repeat, down a slope. Cavers seem
to keep applying the technique to free descents. For free
descents without a descender, use a body rappel--rope through
the crotch, around to the front, up across the chest and over the
opposite shoulder, down the back and held with the right hand
(if it went over the left shoulder) for braking. If you don't
know how to do it--find out and practice it.
BEAR CAVE, PA
April 8
Be - Equipment Failure
Shortly after 3 p.m. on Sunday, April 8, a group of two, Van
Morrow (26) and James Holland (24), entered Bear Cave in
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania. They had registered to
explore the cave at a parking lot at the home of the owner of
the cave. For the exploration they brought two flashlights--at
the entrance one proved to have a bad bulb, so they left it
behind.
They pushed into the maze-like cave doing a stream crawl
that soaked their clothes. When the light went dim, they tried
to retrace their route, getting back through the stream crawl to
a room called the Serpent's Sanctum. Confused by crawlways
beyond this point, they stopped to wait for help.
When they failed to return that evening, Morrow's wife
called authorities and both public agencies and cave rescuers
responded. The stranded cavers were found around midnight
and led from the cave. The batteries from the flashlight left at
the entrance probably would have gotten them out.
REFERENCES:
1) Tom Metzger, Personal Communication, September 26,
1990.
2) Kim Opatka, "New Florence Men Lost in Area Cave,"
Latrobe Bulletin, April 9, 1990, p. 1, 6.
3) Ed., "New Florence Men Lost in Cave Briefly," Tribune-
Review (Greenburg), April 10, 1990, p. D-1.
4) Ed., "Two Men Rescued from Bear Cave," Indiana
Gazette, April 10, 1990, p. 13.
(Plus similar accounts in other local papers.)
LENT CAVE, IN
April 29
AAr - Rockfall
At about 6 p.m. on Saturday, April 29, Roger Neeley (30)
and four companions entered Lent Cave, Greene County,
Indiana. All were inexperienced, but the cave is unusual for the
area in having large rooms and passages.
They proceeded about 1,000 feet into the cave, negotiating
one crawl, to a place where a large boulder, some 15'x5'x3' in
size blocked most of the passage. Two of the party squeezed
past, but when Neeley attempted this, the boulder moved,
pinning him to the bedrock wall of the passage. Two of the
cavers left to summon help while the remaining two freed
Neeley and administered CPR. The authorities were called at
7:15 p.m. Paramedics and fire department personnel were
dispatched and arrived a little after 7:30 p.m. The victim was
soon found to be dead; the body removal took about 2-1/2
hours. He apparently died of internal injuries.
REFERENCES:
1) Will Ott, NSS Accident Report, 9 pages, undated.
2) Ed., "Death of Explorer Called Freak Accident," The
Indianapolis News, April 30, 1990.
3) Gayle Robbins, "Area Man Dies in 'Freak' Cave Accident
Saturday," The Evening World (Bloomfield), April 30, 1990,
p. 1, 8.
COMMENTS: In the press, the incident was generally referred
to as a "freak" accident. Not so--rock movement and instability
is common in caves. Don't crawl under or climb on boulders
or loose rock until you at least try to ascertain the stability.
JOHNSON'S CAVE, TN
May A
Be - Equipment Failure
In May, Jeff Wood and Bill Overton went to Johnson's Cave,
Putnam County, Tennessee, parking on the road close to the
entrance. They proceeded into the cave to the 40-foot pit which
they rigged and descended. At the bottom, they tied off their
rope and made their way further into the cave, rigging and
descending a second pit. After 11 hours in the cave, they were
on their way out when they arrived at the first pit to find the
rope missing.

---------- Page 12 ----------
Wood is a rock climber so he began to free-climb the pit.
Halfway up, his Wheat lamp quit. Overton quickly scrounged
a cyalume from his pack, quickly got it going, and threw it up
to Wood, who was able to hold it in his mouth and complete
the climb. He then rigged the second pit-rope for Overton.
They hurried for the entrance, hoping to catch the
perpetrators, or at least find their names in the register at the
Hall of the Mountain King. They soon smelled smoke and
assumed it was the perpetrators burning the evidence.
REFERENCES:
1) Morris Sullivan, Pesonal Communication, August 4,
1990, 1 page.
2) Patricia Williams, "Spelunker Pleads Guilty to Stealing,"
The Tennessean, July 31, 1990.
COMMENTS: Stealing gear you know is in use--pretty low
trick, right? But there is a second, happy ending--see July 22
report.
THE SINKHOLE, TN
May B
Cor - Rockfall, Other
In mid-May a strange group arrived at The Sinkhole on
Lookout Mountain near Chattanooga, Tennessee. The group
included several veteran vertical cavers, a writer, and Burt
Grossman, a defensive end for the San Diego Chargers football
team. They intended to provide Grossman with his first vertical
cave experience as a publicity stunt. They spent most of the
day practicing at a nearby cliff and felt ready for the real thing.
The pit was rigged with parallel ropes and caver
photographers were poised on a ledge a few feet from the top,
to record the historic moment. The descent went well and the
exit began with Buddy Lane and Grossman climbing the parallel
ropes. Suddenly, a branch "a foot in diameter and twenty-five
feet long" broke off a large, overhanging oak tree landing on
Grossman's rope at the edge of the pit; most of it stayed there,
but a ten foot piece broke off and continued down the pit.
Cavers stationed on the bottom with flash guns saw this,
yelled "Rock!", and scrambled for cover. The warning came
too late for Lane who was struck a glancing blow on the face.
Lane put his hand to his face and pulled it back, covered with
blood. He and Grossman exited as fast as they could and Lane
headed for a hospital for treatment of facial lacerations.
REFERENCE: Roger Ling, "Falling Trees, Bees, and Other
Underground Adventures," Speleonews, October, 1990, p. 95-
97.
UNSPECIFIED CAVE, TX
May 13
Ar- Rockfall
On Sunday, May 13, a group of four entered a cave in Texas.
The entrance, a two-foot triangular opening in breakdown, led
to an easy eight-foot downclimb and on to a large downsloping,
dirt-floored passage. This proved to be a room with a sloping
boulder floor, bare in the middle part and covered with red clay
near the bottom, some 180 feet below the surface. The cave
continued at the end of the room with a climb-down on
breakdown to what appeared to be a lower room. The purpose
of the present trip was to photograph six-foot soda straws in a
lower room, so James Jasek descended to find himself in a
breakdown room eight feet high and 12 feet long, with a ceiling
of "car-sized" boulders. He saw no lead, but noticed fresh
white rock chips on the floor indicating recent collapse, so he
went back to where he could yell to the others not to come
down, that it was unsafe.
Jasek then returned to the breakdown room and looked for
the lead to the soda straw room. He approached a free-standing
"monolith" about two feet wide, 18 inches thick, and about
seven feet tall which suddenly began to fall toward him. He
put out both arms to push it away, but its weight was
irresistible. It continued to fall, failing to crush him only
because he rolled left as it knocked him over. Still, it fell on
his legs and he yelled "with what could be called a true death
scream". Luckily, it continued to slide down a slope, leaving
him free. His left foot took most of the pressure and his heel
bone was fractured. He yelled to the others that he was hurt.
Jasek was able to crawl out of the breakdown room and meet
the others. Coming to his aid, they thought from the sound of
his scream that he had fallen down a pit. He was unable to put
weight on his foot without intense pain and walking, even with
someone's help, was impossible. Still, with assistance, he was
able to crawl and climb to the entrance in about 40 minutes.
The vehicle was parked about a half-mile away and he was able
to hunch along on his behind for most of this. When his arms
gave out, the others carried him the remaining 300 feet. He
was taken to a hospital for treatment of the injury.
REFERENCES:
1) James Jasek, "Jim's Sunday Surprise," The Texas Caver,
June 1990, p. 67-69.
2) James Jasek, Personal Communication, May 21, 1990.
COMMENTS: Jasek feels there are some caves that simply
should be avoided on account of the danger. This particular
incident could easily have been much more serious, even fatal.
In Jasek's words, "I consider myself to be a careful and
cautious caver, always on the lookout for a dangerous situation.
This situation caught me by surprise and even though my
reaction. was instantaneous, I was unable to move fast
enough. (A) cave is a part of nature, and as such, is a very
unforgiving master when disturbed or thrown out of balance.
We must respect it with a vengeance and be ever aware that we
are trespassers in a world of delicate balance."

---------- Page 13 ----------
LAUREL CAVERNS, PA
May 26 A
Ac - Caver Fall
On Saturday, May 26, a group of eight cavers entered Laurel
Caverns, a commercial tour cave in Fayette County,
Pennsylvania. The cave, longest in the state, is a series of
sizable passages connecting large breakdown rooms. Visitors
commonly climb over the breakdown.
The group was a church outing, led by Ken De la Sandro
(30). In one room, Ken began downclimbing a breakdown pile
when he lost his holds and fell approximately 15 feet, landing
feet-first in a small pool of water. The victim was a paramedic
and did his own diagnosis--a fractured fibula. He exited the
cave with aid from his companions. At a hospital, the diagnosis
was confirmed--the fibula was fractured in three places.
REFERENCE: Dan Peden, Personal Communication, June
2, 1990, 4 pp.
COMMENTS: Peden notes the following: "In the emergency
care field, a fall of greater than ten feet where the patient lands
on his feet, is referred to as the "Don Juan Syndrome" named
after the fictional Don Juan, who leaped from balconies to
escape jealous husbands. While the chief complaint of these
patients is usually lower extremity pain (ankle, leg, knee), a
more serious lumbar spine injury often results from the transfer
of energy through this area. Thus, lower back injury with
potentially serious spinal involvement must always be
considered in evaluating and treating (such) victims. When
possible, back immobilization should be employed until x-ray
and neurologic exams show negative."
BEARD'S CAVE, AR
May 26 B
Do Other
On Saturday, May 26, a group of ten cavers from Little Rock
Grotto entered Beard's Cave in Arkansas. A weather forecast
on the radio had predicted severe thunderstorms for that area on
Saturday, but at 11 a.m., as they stood at the entrance debating
the wisdom of entering, the clouds broke a bit and the sun
shone through. Thus encouraged, and wearing wetsuits, they
proceeded through the series of entrance chambers, where
"roaring water cascaded down the chutes."
They then broke into a survey team of three and a push team
of seven. All were keeping an eye out for rising water. Four
hours later, the push team reached the "terminal upper room".
They spent some time there before returning to the stream
passage, some 3/4 mile from the entrance.
At 6:30 p.m. they had gone about 200 feet in the knee deep
water when Dewayne Agin (27), Camille Lide, Adriane Slover
(30) and Michael Zawada (25), the only ones in the water at
that point, "experienced a brief but substantial electric shock".
Two minutes later, there was a second shock and Zawada's
hand was jerked a foot from the wall he was touching by a
muscle contraction. No one was injured, so they continued,
reaching the entrance at 8:30 p.m.; the survey team had exited
earlier and reported that a thunderstorm had occurred outside
the cave at around 6:30 p.m.
REFERENCE: Michael Zawada, "Electric Shock from a
Thunderbolt in Beard's Cave, Arkansas", undated, unpublished
report, 3 pps.
COMMENTS: Electrical discharge from thunderstorm
lightning is an equalizing of potentials between the atmosphere
and a portion of the earth, but is not limited to the absolute
surface of the earth, but rather a portion of the surface, such as
a hill or mountain. Thus, it occurs that ground currents result
in gullies, or fractures on the side of hills or mountains and, as
we see here, even in caves. This is no joke--one does not have
to be "hit" by lightening to be injured or killed. Zawada states
"Severe electric shocks have been reported to cause heart
fibrillation, muscle contractions, bone fractures,
unconsciousness, and respiratory paralysis." Beware.
DEVIL'S KITCHEN CAVE, WV
May 27 A
Ac - Caver Fall
Late in the afternoon of Sunday, May 27, Halley Hoth (27)
and friends had been river rafting when they began to explore
Cooper's Rock State Park, on the Monogalia and Preston
County Line in West Virginia. Devil's Kitchen Cave, a single
fissure passage leading to a large room, is located in the Park,
so the group decided to have a look. A little after 7 p.m., Hoth
took a fall in the large room and suffered major injuries. The
cave, though short, is apparently rather difficult and Hoth's
companions spent two hours trying to deal with the situation
before calling the authorities.
When EMS personnel arrived, they diagnosed a broken
femur, possible broken pelvis, and hypothermia. In addition,
the injuries were causing a great deal of pain. The victim was
removed from the cave via a skylight in the ceiling of the 75-
foot room. This involved a main haul vertically to a Tyrolean
traverse line which got him to the surface at a main section of
the park overlook. The haul took about two hours. The victim
reached the ambulance in the parking lot in about two hours.
REFERENCE: George Dasher, "West Virginia Cave
Rescues," The West Virginia Caver, August, 1990, 8 (4), p.
11.
BOWDEN CAVE, WV
May 27 B
Be Equipment Failure
At about 7 p.m. on Sunday, May 27, a group of three,
Robert Hutton (25), Paul Osterling (25), and Mark Thyram
(23), entered the main entrance to Bowden Cave, Randolph
County, West Virginia. They had no helmets and only three

---------- Page 14 ----------
flashlights. They intended to do a crossover trip, exiting a
particular back entrance of the cave. Though the group leader
had been in the cave four or five times, he apparently had not
heard that this particular entrance had been blocked by a large
boulder for many years. Still, this ignorance was not crucial as
the group was not able to find that entrance. Unfortunately,
two lights failed and the last grew dim. They couldn't find
their way back to the main entrance.
When they failed to return to their camp near Seneca Rocks
the following morning, friends notified authorities in Elkins and
public agencies as well as caver rescuers were mobilized.
Firemen and EMS personnel arrived first and two firemen
plus a paramedic entered the main entrance at around 9 a.m.
Cavers soon arrived and went in the higher entrance to sweep
search back toward the main entrance. The three in the main
entrance followed the main passage up and into the Water
Passage. The three lost cavers were found in the maze beyond
the Water Passage. Everyone was out by 11:10 a.m.
REFERENCE:
George Dasher, "West Virginia Cave
Rescues", The Region Record, 4 (3), September 1990 (also
from The West Virginia Caver, August 1990, 8 (4) p. 11) p.
38.
STEPHENS GAP CAVE, AL
June 9
Cr Rockfall
On Saturday, June 9, a group of eight cavers attending the
Southeast Regional Meeting (NSS) decided to do the 142 foot
Stephens Gap Cave entrance pit in Alabama. They arrived at
the pit at 11 a.m. to find a group of seven already there;
another group of five arrived shortly.
After several of the group of eight had descended the pit,
they decided to visit the cave itself. They rigged at the
"Window" drop, on the side of the pit opposite the trail. This
starts as a three foot oval slot which joins the main pit and
allows cavers to get off at a convenient ledge.
At about 2 p.m. Don Lance (23) the last of the eight-group
to ascend, was coming out the Window when "a three-foot
section of a boulder at his side suddenly broke off and fell into
the pit". The call of "Rock! Rock!" went out instantly as the
rock struck the ledge below, shattering into several "bowling
ball" sized pieces that showered into the pit. One caver from
another group was hit a glancing blow on the leg by a small
piece but this caused no injury and he was able to continue.
Lance froze and observed that another piece was poised to fall.
He was able to maneuver past this and there was no further
incident. Lance suffered only minor lacerations on his thigh.
REFERENCE: Dan Lance, NSS Accident Report, undated,
2 pp.
COMMENTS: This is one of the most hazardous situations in
caving--the multi crew pit descent. Lance reports that the call
of "Rock!" was occurring every so often during the operation
as a caver would accidently knock a stone down the pit. The
best advice is to avoid such scenarios.
NEW TROUT CAVE, WV
June 18
Be - Equipment Failure
At around 9 a.m. on Monday, June 18, a group of three
cavers entered New Trout Cave, Pendelton County, West
Virginia. This is one of four National Speleological Society
owned caves known as Trout Rock Caves along the South
Branch of the Potomac River. The three were Gary Lutes (37)
and his two sons, Gary Jr. (13) and Timothy (9). Lutes' caving
experience stretched back 20 years, but the two boys were
essentially novices. They each had a new Premier carbide lamp
and Gary Sr. carried the one pack containing their only extra
food, water, and carbide along with their backup lights, a
cigarette lighter and a candle. Lutes had experience in this
particular cave and they were also equipped with gloves,
kneepads, and hardhats.
They proceeded 1,000 feet to the Big Room, some 50 feet
across and 20 feet high. They had a bite to eat, then proceeded
into the Maze, a honeycomb of ledges, corridors and tight
passages. When they came to an eight foot drop into a tight
section of passage, Lutes left the pack--he didn't want to
struggle with it in the tight places. They had recarbided ten
minutes before and should have been good for two to three
hours. Ten minutes later they had proceeded some 200 feet
when Tim's light began to fail. They turned back but had gone
only 20 feet before it failed completely. Lutes began to hurry
back to the pack, with the boys following, when Gary Jr.'s
light failed. The area passages were mostly crawlways and
stoopways and Lutes realized he was confused. He tried one
false lead, then another, with the boys asking, "Dad, are you
lost?". When his light, the last of the three, went out, there
was no denying it, they were lost.
Lutes considered crawling on in the dark with the boys
hanging on to him, but if he couldn't find the pack with light,
how could he do it in the dark? He gathered the spent carbide
from the three lamps, collected the unspent pellets, and using
urine in the water chamber, got one lamp going. He didn't find
the pack, but got the three of them into a more spacious
chamber, where they could almost stand, before this carbide,
too, was expended. They sat down to wait in the 54 degree
cave, sitting on their kneepads to conserve heat.
Lutes knew they had a long wait ahead of them--he had not
informed anyone of their intentions. On Wednesday, a local
resident called the West Virginia State Police to report Lutes'
vehicle which hadn't been moved for three days. It had Florida
plates, so Florida authorities were questioned. Lutes' address
in Florida was obtained and called with no answer on
Wednesday and Thursday.
In the cave, the Lutes were going through some changes,
coughing from the dust and dehydration, having chest pains,

---------- Page 15 ----------
irregular breathing, seeing flashes of light, yearning for water
and food, crying, consoling each other, thinking they were
going to die, and praying for one more chance at life. Finally,
they lay down together, weak and knowing the end was coming.
On Friday, the State Police contacted Barry Chute of the
Potomac Speleological Society (the Lutes' vehicle was, of
course, parked near the caves), who called a Florida caver who
learned that the Lutes' were in Pendleton County to go caving,
followed by a visit to grandparents on Thursday night. The
grandparents, when contacted, had assumed the trio was having
a good time caving and was merely delaying their visit.
Cave rescuers were soon mobilized. One immediate problem
was lack of knowledge as to which of the four caves the victims
were in--their vehicle was merely parked on Highway 220.
There was no note on it, nor in the register near the entrance to
New Trout Cave. Lutes was known to be a "squeeze freak" and
one thought was that he was trapped in the Airblower, a
bedding plane constriction in the back of Hamilton Cave.
The cavers on the scene broke up into small parties and did
a cursory search of each cave, finding no sign, and no note in
either of the registers in Hamilton or Trout Caves. More cavers
were mobilized. When New Trout was searched in earnest, the
Lutes' pack was soon found and runners were sent to the
surface to concentrate the manpower. When the rescuers,
expecting a body recovery, continued into the Maze, they were
surprised to have their shouts returned by the Lutes'. Gary
Lutes and Gary Jr. were able to exit under their own power, but
Tim was too weak and had to be carried out. They had been in
the cave for four days and 17 hours.
REFERENCES:
1) Greg Moore, "Family Saved After Five Days in Cavern",
Sunday Gazette-Mail (Charleston, WV), June 24, 1990.
2) AP, "Family Recited Bible While Trapped in Cave",
Marietta Daily Journal, June 25, 1990, p. 1A, 8A.
3) Meg Grant, "Entombed in a Cave for Five Days, a Father
and His Two Young Sons Are Rescued on the Verge of Death",
People Magazine, August 13, 1990, p. 99-106.
4) George Dasher, "West Virginia Cave Rescues", The Region
Record, 4 (3) September 1990, p. 37-40 (from The West
Virginia Caver, August 1990, 8 (4) p. 11.)
5) Russ Carter, "Editors Analysis", The Region Record, 4
(3), September 1990, pp. 39, 42.
COMMENTS: Incredible! Unbelievable! I always thought
the NSS was immune from the totally absurd incidents, the dim
flashlights and knotted ropes. But Mr. Lutes has clearly broken
new ground, and I now turn him over to the kind ministrations
of the honorable Russ Carter.
"Why did an NSS Caver, with 20 years of experience, enter
a cave with only one light per person? Why did their carbide
lamps run out of water after only an hour when normally they
last three to four hours? Why did they leave their pack after
they had to refill their lamps after 45 minutes in the cave? Why
only one pack? Why didn't urinating in the lamp work long
enough to get them to their pack?"
"This rescue should never have taken place. Gary Lutes
violated every rule that the NSS and the rest of organized
caving preaches to each and every one of us: Carry three
sources of light each! Tell someone where you are caving and
when you will return!"
The dust that caused respiratory problems apparently is soot,
left by nitrate miners years ago.
KENNAMER CAVE, AL
June A
Bo - Other
On a Saturday in June, four cavers went to Kennamer Cave,
Alabama, to get some photos of 120-foot Kenna Pit, the
entrance to the cave. The pit was rigged and John Van
Swearingen went down first. From a previous trip he recalled
seeing a bird's nest just ten feet below the lip. Wanting to be
careful when he passed it, he used his legs to keep well out
from the wall. As he arrived at the nest, he was amazed to
observe a five-foot snake coiled on it. Stopping, he looked
closely but was unable to tell if it was poisonous. His situation
was not good if the snake were dangerous--legs spread wide
with the bottom part of his torso just above the level of the
nest. His lower legs were within easy striking distance of the
snake. With his shunt locked, he considered the situation.
If he tried to put on a foot ascender, his body would pivot
into the snake; if he kicked out dropping past the snake, he
might not drop far enough and get the snake in the face, and he
would still have to ascend and the rope might knock the snake
down on him. Moreover, being only ten feet below the lip
greatly reduced his penduluming and kicking-out ability.
Van Swearingen contemplated this for 30 seconds, then called
up to his companions, asking them to look for a long stick.
Such was soon produced and the snake was dislodged, falling
down the pit. The snake survived the fall and was later caught
in a bag and returned to the surface. A description of the snake
later yielded the opinion that it might have been a copperhead.
REFERENCE: John Van Swearingen IV, "A Snake in my
Face", The Huntsville Grotto Newsletter, June/July 1990, p.
45.
ELWOOD'S DROP, IA
June B
Cr - Rockfall
In June, three cavers did 54-foot deep Elwood's Drop in
Winneshick County, Iowa. On the way out, Mike Nelson was
halfway up when he was struck by a fist-sized rock which had
fallen from the lip of the drop. The rock brushed his jaw and
struck his arm at the inside of the elbow, leaving a minor
bruise. He continued without further incident. Nelson was the
second caver to ascend so the instability may have been caused
by the first to go up.

---------- Page 16 ----------
REFERENCE: Mike Nelson, "Accident Report", July 10,
1990, unpublished, 1 pp.
APE CAVE, WA
June 24
Ac - Caver Fall
At about 4:30 p.m. on Sunday, June 24, a group of eleven
entered the upper entrance to Ape Cave in the Mt. St. Helens
Volcanic National Monument in southern Washington. This
was a co-ed scout outing from Port Orchard, Washington. The
group was in the area to climb the south side of Mt. St. Helens
and wanted to do the cave as a "warm-up". The scouts had no
helmets or individual lights and had to cluster around to closely
follow the three adult leaders who each had a rental gas lantern.
They proceeded some 500 feet into the descending lava tube.
Trip leader, Scott Hansen (41), was leading when his left foot
stepped into a crack between two knee-high lava boulders,
slipped on the muddy surface and toppled sideways. He
received cuts from the sharp lava and suffered a broken left leg.
One of the leaders administered first aid while the other
herded the group back outside and sent runners to notify the
National Park Service of the problem. NPS and Sheriff's
Department personnel assisted in the evacuation of the victim.
He reached the ambulance three hours after the accident.
REFERENCE: John Clardy, Personal Report, undated, 5 pp.
COMMENTS: Clardy was at the scene and informed the group
of NSS educational services, which they sorely needed.
JACK SPRING CAVE, KS
Summer A
Db - Bad Air
A group of four cavers entered Jack Spring Cave, Chase
County, Kansas, for a survey trip. Before they reached their
survey starting point, approximately 3,600 feet into the cave,
they noted the odor of petroleum. As soon as the survey was
started, two of the four were complaining about not feeling
well. By the 110th survey station, at approximately 5,200 feet
in, Jon Beard and James Young turned back; at that point,
Young was having to rest during each survey leg, even though
it was walking passage. A few hundred feet toward the
entrance Beard developed a very bad headache and vomited the
first of six times, the last after exiting. It is speculated that
high local precipitation runoff in 1990 had carried oil well
effluent into the cave, as well as depleting the oxygen content.
The cave is poorly ventilated.
REFERENCE: Jonathan Beard, Ozark Underground, August
1990.
ANTONIA PIT, MO
Summer B
Ace - Caver Fall, Equipment Failure
On a summer trip to Antonia Pit, two cavers, Lannis
Crutcher and Jack Parker rigged the 80-foot drop and prepared
to go down. Parker descended first; Crutcher rigged in and
started down but found, to her exhilaration, that her rack,
which she had carefully applied to the rope, was not functioning
properly. Parker heard the rappel going too fast and grabbed the
rope, thus breaking her descent with his arms. Still, she hit
hard, spraining her ankles and bruising Parker's forearms. It
was then discovered that the rack hadn't malfunctioned, it was
simply not attached to her seat harness. She had rappelled on
her gloves. They exited the cave with some difficulty, and later
x-rays showed the ankles to be broken.
REFERENCE: Lannis Crutcher, Meramec Caver (Meramec,
Valley Grotto, Missouri), July 1990.
BIGFOOT CAVE, CA
July
Cre - Rockfall, Equipment Failure
In early July, a group of cavers entered Bigfoot Cave,
Siskiyou County, California, via the Hanging Rocks Entrance,
to rig the series of pits inside for use during pre-convention
activities at the NSS annual convention. After rigging the pits,
Bob Richardson and companions proceeded to the Hanging
Rocks-Discovery Passage connection, where Hanging Rocks
Cave had been connected to Bigfoot a few years before. The
connection was through a highly-inclined, slot that had been
dug open--one-handed, one arm extended, and one arm back to
fit in the slot. Richardson wanted to remove additional material
to make the squeeze easier. To facilitate his ability to turn his
head and see while in the dig, he removed his helmet before
entering. He was moving loose material when a rock fell from
higher in the slot, striking him on the head and causing a scalp
laceration. Richardson backed out of the slot, received first aid
from his companions, and exited the cave, wearing his helmet.
REFERENCE: Bob Richardson, Personal Communication,
July 1990.
BUCKNER CAVE, IN
July 8
Bl - Losing the Way
On Sunday, July 8, a group of 16 cavers, an adult and 15
young people ages between the ages of 8 and 16, entered
Buckner Cave in Monroe County, Indiana, and proceeded to the
Volcano Room before they became totally disoriented. They sat
it out and were rescued by a local emergency squad around
midnight.
REFERENCE: Will Ott, Cave Incident Information Form,
8 pps., July 16, 1990.

---------- Page 17 ----------
McFAIL'S CAVE, NY
July 21
Co Other
At approximately 12:00 p.m. on Saturday, July 21, 1990,
Ken Davis, Kevin Dumont, Eric Kirchner, and Christine
Langford entered McFail's Cave, Schoharie Co., New York,
via the Hall's Hole entrance. The qualified McFail's leader for
the group was Kevin Dumont. The group proceeded down the
Coeyman's Passage to the Main Passage, then travelled directly
to the main sump. The entire group was warned near the start
of the trip of thin lateral layers of sandstone which have been
eroded to razor sharpness that are present in part of the cave.
It was pointed out by the leader that people in the past had
emerged from the cave with serious cuts on their cheeks.
Shortly after leaving the sump and heading back upstream,
Langford's left wrist made contact with the wall. Because of
this contact, Langford suffered one serious cut and several
smaller ones. The wrist was cleaned with Neosporin and
bandaged compressed gauze and medical tape that were in a first
aid kit Davis carried. The group then proceeded out of the cave
with a short diversion upstream past the Coeyman's Passage.
Langford ascended out of Hall's Hole with little difficulty. She
later saw a doctor who informed her that she could have used
stitches but it was healing fine without them.
REFERENCE: Kevin Dumont, "Accident Report", August 14,
1990, 1 page, unpublished, reproduced here in entirety.
JOHNSON'S CAVE, TN
July 22
Be - Equipment Failure
On Sunday, July 22, a group of six entered Johnson's Cave,
Putnam County, Tennessee. These were Mike Wallis (19),
Yvette Sherman (18), Toby Jordan (16), Allen Watts (16),
Dusty Proctor (14), and Russell Millheim (17). Wallis had
reportedly been to the cave some ten times, but one might
presume the others to be inexperienced. They were equipped
with water, food, flashlights, and a rope.
The group proceeded as far as the 40-foot drop where they
rigged the rope, and all but Proctor and Millheim descended.
They found that it was not so easy to get back up. No one
had any ascending equipment and it was soon clear that they
were stranded in the 56-degree cave. Fortunately, Proctor and
Millheim were able to go for help.
Rescue volunteers and public agency personnel arrived at
dawn Monday and had the stranded cavers out by 8 a.m.
REFERENCES:
1) Patricia Williams, "Proper Gear Would Have Helped:
Caver", The Tennessean, July 24, 1990, p. 1A.
2) Ed., "Theft Victim's Name Wrong in Cave Story", Ibid.,
August 1, 1990.
3) Patricia Williams, "Spelunker Pleads Guilty to Stealing",
Ibid., July 31, 1990.
4) Morris Sullivan, Personal Communication, August 4,
1990.
COMMENTS: This common little incident has a wonderful
footnote--one of those little twists of fate that I find so dear.
One of the rescuers, Jody Landrum, Chairman of the
Nashville Chapter of the NSS, had listened at a chapter meeting
to Ward and Overton's account of having rope and rigging gear
stolen at Johnson's Cave in May. At the current rescue,
Landrum overheard Wallis talking about stealing a rope.
Landrum inquired; Wallis showed him the gear--the rope was
the same as the one belonging to Ward and the carabiners were
stamped with the initials "WO" for William Overton. Busted!
Wallis pleaded guilty and received two 30-day suspended
sentences of which he was required to serve five days each, as
well as a $50 fine and court costs. According to Sullivan, this
totalled around $1,100.
CAVE DISAPPOINTMENT, NY
July 28
Bse - Stuck, Equipment Failure
At about noon on July 28, a group of four entered Cave
Disappointment with the intention of doing a crossover trip and
exiting Hanors Cave in time for the Helderberg-Hudson Grotto
meeting at 4 p.m. The group were Richard Atwood, Pete
Johnson (leader), and Johnson's sons, Kyle (10) and Evan (7).
They rigged the 50-foot entrance drop and rappelled in. At
the bottom there is a 10-12 inch wide crack that leads down at
a 45 degree angle for about five feet to a wider, horizontal
chamber about six to seven feet long. Johnson and his sons
proceeded through the slot but, when Atwood tried to follow,
he became stuck. He tried to climb back up, but thin
projections on the walls caught his clothes, impeding progress.
After a half-hour of struggling, he returned to the bottom of the
entrance pit.
The problem now was that Atwood and the boys had no rope
ascending gear. Johnson and the other two returned to the pit
and Johnson ascended. He rigged a 30-foot cable ladder to the
end of the rappel rope and re-rigged the pit so that it could be
ascended via the ladder with the other end of the rappel rope
used to belay the climbers. A climber would ascend the ladder
to a ledge, the ladder would be repositioned and the climber
would continue to the surface.
The boys got out in this manner, but Atwood was too tired
from his struggle and could only get halfway up the ladder.
At 2:45 p.m. Johnson hiked back to the truck and drove to
the grotto meeting to initiate a rescue going. Cavers responded
and the stranded caver was hauled out of the pit at 4:30 p.m.
REFERENCE: Lloyd Johnson, Personal Communication,
undated, 2 pages.
COMMENTS: Johnson feels he should have had more
knowledge of the cave--he had only one caver's description of

---------- Page 18 ----------
the crossover and two maps, neither of which showed a
squeeze. One should take special care in planning crossovers--
they seem to create an inordinate number of incidents.
UNNAMED CAVE, VA
August 2
Be - Equipment Failure
At about 1 p.m. on Thursday, August 2, Mark Fowler (27),
entered a newly opened cave in a road cut on US 460 in
Tazewell County, Virginia, near the West Virginia-Virginia
border. An excavation had exposed the cave but the opening
was too small to enter. On July 30, Fowler had enlarged this
opening and made a short excursion into the cave.
Thursday was Fowler's day off; he wore coveralls but no
helmet and had a single electric light. He explored for a couple
of hours. After down climbing into a hole with steep mud
banks on the walls, the light failed. In the dark, Fowler could
not climb up so he sat down to wait for help.
Fowler's parents reported him missing at about 11 p.m., but
he had not told them where he was going. He commonly went
solo caving, but had not taken all his caving gear and had taken
his gym clothes. Fowler did not drive, so his whereabouts
would not be revealed by a vehicle near the entrance of a cave.
His caving friends were unaware of the road cut cave and
figured Beacon Cave in Mercer County was the most likely, and
spent the night searching upstream in that cave. At 7 a.m. on
Friday a general call went out for cave rescuers.
A group went back to Beacon Cave, split into two groups--
each taking an entrance--searching until they met in the cave, at
which point they all searched downstream with no success.
As this group left, another arrived and was directed to search
yet another part of the cave. They also found nothing.
The rescuers reformed and decided to send a group to Big
Springs Cave and another to check out some of the caves west
along US 460. They stopped at the new section of road to
check some openings and noticed evidence of excavation at one.
Two rescuers entered this while a second passable opening was
checked by another team. The first group reached a 30-foot pit
about 50 feet in and started yelling to see if the other group had
entered the same cave. In reply, they heard "a voice which
sounded way off". Silence among the rescuers was requested
and achieved. Mark's name was shouted--he replied.
The victim's exact location was not easy to determine; the
cave was quite fractured from construction blasting. They
began to penetrate further by rigging and rappelling the pit
while the State Police blocked traffic on US 460, keeping
vehicles away from the entrance.
Passages off the bottom of the pit ended with no victim. As
they ascended the pit, a crawl near the top with scuff marks was
noticed. Yelling indicated the victim to be down this.
The 30-foot crawl led to a walking slot for 40 feet, then
turned right and became a 4-foot tube sloping up and over
another 30-foot pit. At this point, they conversed with Fowler,
learning that he was unhurt but in a hole he couldn't climb. A
rope was brought and one caver traversed above the pit on
belay, moved on a bit and was able to fetch Fowler out of his
hole. He was checked by an EMT and they headed for the
entrance. A belay got everyone across the top of the first pit
and they were soon out.
REFERENCE: Mike Lawhorn, "Cave Rescue-August 3,
1990", The West Virginia Caver, (5), October 1990, p. 8-9.
ANALYSIS: "Mark Fowler broke all the rules in the book.
He went into a highly unstable cave. He left no instructions or
information as to his intentions. He had no extra lights or
provisions. He did not have the proper equipment and he was
caving alone."
It was just blind luck that led rescuers to check that particular
hole and, if Fowler had not been able to communicate, he
would probably still be there.
ROTORHEAD CAVE, WY
August 11
Br - Rockfall
On Saturday, August 11, a group of three cavers entered
Rotorhead Cave in the Bighorn Mountains of north-central
Wyoming. These were Blaine Davis, Dave Baker, and Monte
Harnden. The cave entrance is in a small, obscure sink about
1/4 mile from the Hunt Mountain Road. This entrance leads
past moss-covered rocks to a broad, low room with a few small
speleothems. A hole along the right wall leads on, up a slope
and through a constriction to a debris choke where a slight air
flow indicated more cave beyond. The group had come to dig
and made good progress until they encountered a huge
breakdown block that essentially filled the passage. They
inspected it, deciding to dig around it on the right side. After
30 minutes or so a portion of the block was broken off and
removed. The hole was still too small for Davis or Harnden,
but Baker was able to squeeze past on his left side. He then
had to position himself for the upward move to get between the
block and the ceiling where a seven-inch gap apparently led
further. The vertical angle to reach the gap was 70 degrees.
As Baker struggled with this, the others turned to an
adjacent, alternate dig. Occasionally, they would stop to listen
to Baker's efforts. After numerous breaks, they suddenly heard
nothing and called to him. His response couldn't be understood
so Harnden backed out of his dig to hear Baker calling for help.
He went to his aid immediately to find that as Baker had tried
to get between the block and the ceiling, a 30 pound, triangular
rock had dislodged and landed on his back; any movements by
Baker now caused the rock to settle to his right, wedging
between him and the wall and trapping him. For Harden, an
image of Floyd Collins came "like a rocketship from hell".
Harnden could squeeze in and reach the tip of the rock but
wiggling it only served to wedge it tighter to Baker's right.
After some effort, it seemed that the rock would have to come
out, along Baker's right side. Davis, in the chamber behind
and below, was wondering if sleeping bags to ward off

---------- Page 19 ----------
hypothermia, and outside help, should be obtained. They
discussed this and decided to work on the rock for awhile.
Harden returned and managed to tip the rock up, turning a
jagged corner into Baker's back and, with "considerable effort",
forced it back between him and the wall, gouging Baker's back
in the process. The rock was passed back to Davis and they all
wiggled out of the squeeze.
REFERENCE: Monte Harnden, "The Close Call", Rocky
Mountain Caving, Autumn 1990, p. 25.
TRES CHARROS CAVE, WY
August 12
Bc - Caver Fall
On Sunday, August 12, three cavers, Blaine Davis, Dave
Baker, and Monte Harnden entered Tres Charros Cave in the
Bighorn Mountains of north-central Wyoming. They had no
map of the cave and previously had only been as far as Bat Veil
Falls. They proceeded down the 40-foot pit at Bat Veil and
headed downstream to the big falls where they crossed into
upper level passage, getting as far as the 110-foot Virgin's
Promise Pit. They then retreated to the big falls and found
their way into Hayford and into Sheepherder Canyons.
Near a dry sump that had been dug open, they entered a
cross-joint passage and headed down this to where it resembled
a 30-40 foot diameter funnel with very steep sides. Harnden
wanted a closer look at the pit in the center so he started down
the apparently virgin slope. Their only rope had been rigged at
Bat Veil Falls, so he relied on the mud crust yielding footholds
in the sand beneath. For several steps this worked fine as his
heels dug in well, but the sand then turned to rock with the
mud acting as a lubricant. Harnden's feet shot out from under
him and he was "sliding uncontrollably toward the hell's mouth
below". He let out a scream and tried to get a climbing
protection stopper into some crack. Fortunately he had chosen
his down-route so as to be above a small dormer-like protrusion
at the edge of the he was stopped by this. As he held
on, "I could probably have clung to greased glass with little
more than my fingernails", his companions tied every spare bit
of sling together and lowered the resulting line to him. Thus
aided, Harnden got back up the slope and they left the cave
without further incident.
REFERENCE: Monte Harnden, "The Close Call", Rocky
Mountain Caving, Autumn 1990, p. 25-26.
ORGAN CAVE, WV
Fall A
Cc - Caver Fall
On a trip to Organ Cave, West Virginia, cavers Raymond
Sira and Sandy Knapp were attempting to follow a map to get
to the Sarver Room via the Octopus Passage when the crawl
they were in broke into a large room with a 20-foot drop to the
floor. When Sira, in the lead, emerged from the tight crawl, he
had to chimney out with his arms; when he swung his body out,
there were no footholds and he fell the 20 feet. He landed on
his feet, twisting his ankle and bruising his back. He was able
to exit under his own power without too much difficulty.
REFERENCE: Raymond Sira, Speleothems (Northern New
Jersey Grotto), Fall 1990.
PHERRIS PIT, TN
Fall B
De - Equipment Failure
A group of cavers was doing 252-foot Pherris Pit in
Tennessee and had rigged two ropes to facilitate the effort.
Angela Morgan ascended with a Frog System and was 40 feet
from the top when someone above noticed that the sheath had
worn through on the rope she was using. She was informed
and switched over to the second rope and completed her ascent.
REFERENCE: Ray Hardcastle, "Ray's Review", NSS News,
May 1991, p. 154 (in Undergraph Interground [Intergraph
Grotto, NSS], October 1990).
COMMENTS: It appears the rope rubbed on rock at the lip
through a hole in the rope pad. Apparently the Frog System
was also producing bounce in the rope during the ascent. The
combination wore the rope very quickly. I must comment that
"bounce", either during ascent or descent, should be considered
unacceptable. If you tend to bounce, and cannot damp it out or
become smoother, you should change equipment or techniques.
It is not the fault of rope stretch. Furthermore, avoid cavers
who generate bounce-they are a danger to themselves and
others.
SPANISH CAVE, CO
September
Ac - Caver Fall
On Saturday, September 1, a group of five cavers backpacked
three miles and entered the Frank's Pit (upper) Entrance to
Spanish Cave, at over 11,000 feet elevation, in the Rocky
Mountains of Colorado. They were Jerry and Helen Hassemer
(51), Jim Wilson, Skip Withrow, and Steve Hawkins, all of the
Colorado Grotto, NSS, and experienced cavers. The objectives
were a through-trip to the lowest entrance and a survey of the
connection between the Waterfall Pit and the Black Slide.
They squeezed through the small slot of the Frank's Pit
Entrance and rappelled the 140-foot drop. The group proceeded
to the Black Slide where Jerry Hassemer and Hawkins went
ahead to the Waterfall Pit to establish voice contact through the
unsurveyed connection. After waiting a half hour, the trailing
group became chilled in the 34 degree, breezy cave and yelled
that they were going on. They proceeded to the Overhand
Dome Room, just beyond the Black Slide where an etrier is
hung to facilitate the 13-foot descent. This is a rope or sling
with loops tied or sewn at intervals for foot and hand holds.

---------- Page 20 ----------
At about 8 p.m., Helen Hassemer began the descent. After
getting over the edge, she had trouble finding the next lower
foot loop. Her other foot came out of its loop, leaving her
hanging by her hands. She called to Wilson for help. He
started to climb to her position, but she lost her grip and fell 12
feet to the bottom of the drop, landing on her back.
Wilson yelled to Withrow to get Hassemer and Hawkins.
Wilson descended and examined the still conscious victim. She
had a high level of pain in her lower back but could squeeze her
hand and move her feet. There were apparently no broken
bones or nerve damage. By the time the others arrived, she was
shivering and uncertain of her ability to even stand.
The danger of hypothermia and remote location of the cave
demanded that the group self-rescue, so her damaged headlamp
was repaired and she was helped up. She seemed strong enough
so they set off with Jerry leading the way. They proceeded past
the Coral Slide and through the T-slot where one must manage
a 2 X 2-foot crawlway at the crossbar.
Just short of the First Great Chamber they had to help her up
an ascent with a rope looped under her armpits--this allowed
them to pull from above and lift from below. They then
traversed for 200 feet above a 50-foot deep fissure. At the Jug,
an exposed traverse above a 170-foot deep pit, and near the
lower entrance, they were able to cross easily on a heavy crust
of snow and ice. They exited the cave at 10:30 p.m. and
Hassemer was taken to a hospital. She had suffered a burst
compression of the lumbar I vertebra. Nearly complete
recovery is expected.
REFERENCES:
1) Helen Hassemer, NSS Accident Report, undated, 2 pages.
2) James V. Wilson, "Spanish! Ole!", Rocky Mountain
Caving, Autumn 1990, p. 12, 27.
COMMENTS: The victim had made three previous through
trips and so was familiar with this particular etrier. The
difference this time was that no one was below, helping spot her
footwork. Her helmet, a Joe Brown, and a small backpack
probably saved her from more serious injury.
An etrier is, in essence, a cable ladder, except that it is more
difficult to use. No such ladder should ever be used without a
belay. An etrier is a rock climbing tool. I personally feel that
a rope should be rigged for short drops and even a 10-foot drop
should be easily rappelled. Etriers should not be used in place
of rope, but there have been several reported accidents of this
type. Just don't use them.
BEE TREE CAVE, IN
September 16
Bs Stuck
At about 4 p.m. on Sunday, September 16, two poorly
equipped cavers, Bob Bowling (20) and Tony Bunton (22)
entered Bee Tree Cave in Monroe County, Indiana. They
entered the "football-sized" entrance and descended the initial
canyon passage, over the Saddle and down the Crevice. On the
climb back to the Saddle, Bunton (22) became trapped when his
belt buckle caught on a protrusion and he was unable to get a
foothold to force himself past the obstruction.
His companion went for help and the caver was freed by
emergency services personnel at about 5:30 p.m.
REFERENCE: Will Ott, Cave Incident Information Form,
undated, 7 pps.
NICKWACKETT CAVE, VT
September 29
Ble - Losing the Way, Equipment Failure
Between 2 and 3 p.m. on Saturday, September 29, John
Butler (26) and John Presti (31) entered Nickwackett Cavern in
Chittenden, Vermont. They were dressed in pants and flannel
shirts over T-shirts, had no hard hats, and had only flashlights
for light. Intending to explore for only an hour, they proceeded
into the 200-foot long crawlway cave. They passed through
two small rooms and slid down a steep, narrow bellycrawl.
This led to a small chamber some four feet high and three feet
wide, followed by a constriction and another chamber. They
had lost one flashlight on the way in and planned to retrieve it
on the way out. When the second light began to fade, they
turned back but became disoriented. They became convinced
that a passage they had not traversed coming in was the way out
and tried to make it work about 15 different times--they were
sure that a squeeze past a rock would go if they just did it right.
When 12 hours had passed, their flashlight finally went out, and
they were forced to sit and wait for rescue.
On Monday night Butler failed to report for work and the
State Police were called. The police made inquiries and learned
that the pair had told acquaintances that they planned to explore
some caves that weekend. On Tuesday, a State Trooper,
Dennis Holman, investigated further, going to local caves that
he thought the men might have gotten directions to.
There was no sign of them at the Pittsford Ice Caves (a
woman at a store had told them these were "wimp" caves), but
their car was found at Nickwackett Cavern, with a knapsack and
some clothing found just inside the cave entrance.
Meanwhile, the two were not faring well in the cave. With
no food or water and the temperature barely above freezing,
they huddled together between rocks trying to stay warm.
The police officer and a man from the Pittsford Fire
Department entered and found the lost cavers only 70 to 80 feet
from the entrance. They had been in the cave for three days.
They were treated for hypothermia (body temperature 95
degrees F), but were otherwise unharmed.
REFERENCES:
1) Michael Maynard, "Men Lost in Cave Rescued", Rutland
Herald, October 3, 1990, pp. 1, 4.
2)
Amy Blotcher Guerro, "Brocton Men's Venture into

---------- Page 21 ----------
Vermont Cave Becomes 3-Day Ordeal", The Enterprise
(Brocton), October 3, 1990, p. 1.
APOGEE CAVE, CA
October 8
Dr - Rockfall
On October 8, a group of cavers entered Apogee Cave, the
highest of the group of caves in and adjacent to Marble Valley
in Siskiyou County, California. The cave is rather complex
with the main part being a sinuous, multi-level affair with offset
(out-of-phase) sinuosities. One side lead they mapped led to a
blockage of massive breakdown. Through spaces in this, a
large chamber with an enticing echo could be seen above. One
caver penetrated a squeeze and found a complicated way up into
the room. Derek Hoyle and companions were working on
another route and were encouraged by the remarks from the
chamber, that it appeared to be virgin. Hoyle was trying to
negotiate a large slab and had just removed himself from under
it when it suddenly slammed down, eliminating the space he had
exited. After a few minutes to revive their courage, the group
squeezed up through the breakdown, only to find that the room
was known and mapped.
REFERENCE: Derek Hoyle, Personal Communication,
October 8, 1990.
SUNBEAM CAVE, CA
October 13
Br - Rockfall
On Saturday, October 13, three cavers entered Sunbeam
Cave, a cold alpine cave in the Marble Mountain Wilderness of
northern California. These were Mark Fritzke, Andy Maxwell
and Jerry Davis. They descended the 60-foot entrance pit and
the narrow crevice leading to the stream level. They proceeded
upstream through a stream passage bellycrawl. Part of this
passage has an unstable ceiling and the newcomers, Davis and
Maxwell, were warned of this before they went through.
After some time in the upstream area, the group headed for
the exit, but split when Davis stopped to recarbide. Maxwell,
a novice caver, remained with Davis while Fritzke continued on
to the bottom of the entrance drop. After getting his lamp
going, Davis led the way as he and Maxwell continued toward
the entrance. When they passed through the unstable area,
Maxwell apparently forgot the warnings, since he proceeded on
hands and knees. When he bumped the ceiling at one point, it
collapsed, thrusting him forward, his knees bent, arms trapped
by his sides, and only his head and shoulders protruding from
the rocks. He was held immobile by several hundred pounds of
rocks. The crawlway was low enough that Maxwell's body
blocked access to the collapse.
Davis assessed the situation and headed for the entrance to
get Fritzke. This took longer than it should have since, at first,
he couldn't remember the way. In 15 minutes, he and Fritzke
were back at the collapse. It was obvious that Maxwell would
have to be freed from upstream. Fortunately, the stream
passage at that point is broad, something not obvious since most
of it is only an inch or two high. Fritzke noticed a ceiling
channel in the low area and succeeded in trenching and digging
his way around the collapse.
Fritzke proceeded to remove the entrapping rocks, a nasty
operation, since removal of rocks at first caused others to come
down from above. Still, Maxwell was freed in some 15
minutes of digging. He was able to exit the cave under his own
power. He had been trapped for about 35 minutes.
REFERENCE: Rich Sundquist, "Caving in the Marbles", The
Valley Caver, Winter 1990.
COMMENTS: Maxwell's bent-knee position probably saved
him from suffocation. In the cold alpine cave he also probably
would not have survived a lengthy excavation. The separation
of the party could also have been fatal-keep together.
TRAPDOOR CAVE, IN
October 16
Ar Rockfall
About 2 a.m. Sunday morning, October 14, a group of four
approached Trapdoor Cave near Bloomington in Monroe
County, Indiana. They had been partying, had become bored,
and decided to go caving. One had been caving once before;
they had two hardhats, a half-dozen flashlights and some beer.
They signed the register at the Buckner's Cave kiosk and
proceeded to the Trapdoor Cave Entrance, a narrow, eight-foot
climbdown. The climb leads to a 20-foot crawl into the first
room of the cave. The first caver, Kurt, entered at 3:15 a.m.
and, without a helmet, did the crawlway face up. At the end,
he reached up to grab a rock in the ceiling to pull himself into
a sitting position. The rock fractured, dropping a "briefcase-
sized" piece, as well as smaller pieces, onto his face and upper
body. He fell backward from his near-sitting position, his head
striking a rock protruding from the floor at a 45-degree angle.
He screamed for help.
The "experienced" caver came to his aid, but could not free
him from the debris. The other two were sent for help and
contacted Dick Blenz at his home nearby, and a rescue callout
was initiated. The Indiana Scientific Speleological Association
Speleorendesvous was that weekend and cavers camping in the
area were mobilized. The rocks were removed and the victim
exited under his own power. He had suffered only bruises and
a head laceration.
REFERENCE: Jay Savage, "Accident Report--Trapdoor Cave,
Indiana", unpublished, undated, 3 pages.
COMMENTS: "This accident is another in the series of
incidents involving inexperienced persons going into caves for
thrills. They were tired to begin with, had been drinking,

---------- Page 22 ----------
lacked proper equipment, and.
had no idea what they were
getting into."
Savage also reports that this particular cave entrance has
instability resulting from: 1) fracturing due to freeze-thaw
cycles, 2) a sandstone conglomerate in the limestone at the
entrance drop, and 3) water erosion during rainstorms when, on
occasion, a pond with a whirlpool covers the entrance.
HOLE-TO-HELL, ID
October 26
Aec -Equipment Failure, Caver Fall
On Thursday evening, October 25, two students from College
of Southern Idaho, Zack Harper (18) and Jess Morgan (19),
were in Dead Horse Cave, Gooding County, Idaho. They were
decorating the lava cave for a dance on Friday. Harper knew
of a nearby cave, Hole-to-Hell that was a pigeon roost. They
decided to catch some to release during the dance as a prank.
They entered Hole-to-Hell shortly after 3 a.m. on October
26, each armed with a flashlight, some "clothesline twine", and
an old hemp rope. The 52-foot entrance is a 4-foot diameter
shaft opening into a bell-shaped chamber containing the pigeon
roost and a pile of guano-covered breakdown.
The descent was made hand-over-hand on the hemp rope.
The pigeon hunt was apparently unsuccessful SO they began
climbing out. Morgan made it to the first ledge 24 feet up.
Harper was almost to the ledge when the rope, having frayed on
the sharp lava, broke, dropping Harper 22 feet to the
breakdown below.
Morgan apparently down-climbed, found Harper still able to
climb. He tied him to the end of the clothesline and re-
ascended to the ledge. Harper, with Morgan pulling, got to
within 4 feet of the ledge before the clothesline broke, and he
again fell to the breakdown. Morgan apparently also fell, but
suffered only minor forearm and face lacerations. Harper had
by now accumulated major fractures and lacerations on his
upper body and head and was in critical condition. Morgan
stayed with Harper, trying to keep him alive.
At 7 a.m. a friend arrived at Dead Horse Cave expecting to
find them camped there. They were not, and Harper's truck
was visible on a hill to the northwest. Near the truck he spied
the entrance to Hole-to-Hell and at the edge he could hear
Morgan yelling "Breathe, dammit! Breathe!" He went for
help, notifying the Gooding County Sheriff's Office at 7:48
a.m. An ambulance, firefighters and Jerome County Search and
Rescue were mobilized, arriving at 8:25 a.m. Paramedics
rappelled in, stabilized Harper, and placed him in a Stokes
litter. He was winched to the surface at 9:30 a.m., and flown
by helicopter to Magic Valley Regional Medical Center, still in
critical condition. Morgan was brought to the surface at 10
a.m. Harper survived.
REFERENCE: David Johns, "NSS Accident Report Form",
undated, 3 pages.
COMMENTS: Johns feels that the ability of local emergency
services to deal with the unusual situation probably saved
Harper's life. In the West, distances are great and what
organized cave rescue exists cannot usually be fast in response.
Helping to train existing rescue agencies in cave rescue seems
a good idea.
ONYX CAVE, AZ
November 10A
Ac - Caver Fall
At about 10:30 a.m. on Saturday, November 10, Richard
Lind (leader), David Harley, Elke and Herbert Buschbeck, and
James Luper entered Onyx Cave, near Sonoita, Arizona. Lind
had visited the cave many times and was familiar with the
numerous tricky climbs with vertical exposure and slippery
surfaces. All were experienced cavers but it was the first time
in Onyx for Harley and Herbert Buschbeck. Their ages ranged
from 25-35.
They proceeded about 1,200 feet from the entrance to a lower
section of the cave, through one low crawlway and several
exposed up-and-down climbs. At about 11:30 a.m., Harley was
climbing a ten-foot pitch from a ledge above a five-foot deep
dry rimstone pool, when he lost his holds and fell about ten
feet. It was quickly diagnosed that he had suffered a broken
forearm. A sling was rigged to secure the arm to his side and
they headed out. They had extra ropes and ascending gear; a
makeshift rig was devised to allow the victim to climb rope at
each vertical pitch. Part way out, they found a broken stalactite
that was used, with foam padding, nylon webbing and duct
tape, to splint the arm. They exited the cave at 3 p.m.
REFERENCE: Sweet, "Onyx Cave Accident", unpublished
report, undated, 2 pages. (Based on interviews with Luper and
Lind, November 15, 1990.)
COMMENTS: Luper and Lind attribute this accident to
overconfidence. Harley was an experienced rock climber and
moved up the pitch quickly, violating the basic rule of
climbing--to maintain three points of support (good holds) at all
times. I would point out that a truly developed rock climber
knows when he is secure and what is chancy. My own rule is
to resist climbing anything without a belay that I can't come off
of without injury. A spotter below such a short pitch might
have prevented an injury in a fall like this--the idea is that the
spotter tries to keep the falling caver from landing on his head,
arm or other fragile part of the body.
BONE/NORMAN CAVE, WV
November 10B
Bl - Losing the Way
Saturday afternoon, November 10, a group of four Canadian
cavers entered the Bone Cave Entrance to the Bone/Norman
System in Greenbriar County, West Virginia, with the intention
of doing a crossover, exiting the Norman Cave Entrance. The

---------- Page 23 ----------
leader was an experienced caver, and had done the crossover
some three years before. Two were novices and for the one, it
was his first cave trip. Their ages were estimated to be from
late teens to early twenties.
Bone/Norman is a 14-mile extremely complex system; the
Bone Cave portion is quite dry while Norman has a very active
stream. The crossover normally takes about six hours with the
connection being a very tight squeeze.
It rained all night Friday and many planned cave trips into
wet caves had been aborted. The group of four proceeded
through Bone Cave, through the connection and to the point in
Norman where one leaves the stream and ascends into a huge
breakdown passage that leads to the entrance. There are several
routes through the breakdown from the stream up into the
passage, all involving constrictions between the breakdown.
The Canadians took a route that led to a small breakdown room
beneath the main borehole. At this point the beginner was out
of light and the leader was apparently confused as to the route.
They hesitated.
At midnight, their friends came to the WVACS Fieldhouse to
report them overdue. Cavers responded and soon located the
group. They were not totally out of options, but with a little
extra light and guidance were soon out. The last rescue group
was out and back to the Fieldhouse by 6 a.m.
REFERENCE: George Dasher, Personal Communications,
November 18, 1990; November 26, 1990. (Also, Al Stubbe,
Tidewater Ooze [Tidewater Grotto], December 1990.)
COMMENTS: It may well be that this was a non-incident. It
is reported that the Canadians had slept in and not entered the
cave until late--thus they may not have been "overdue" and
might have gotten out quite well on their own.
LADD'S MOUNTAIN CAVE, GA
November 18
Ac - Caver Fall
At around 4 p.m. on Sunday, November 18, two men, Ray
Thomas (24) and Donald Chitwood, entered a cave on Ladd's
Mountain in Bartow County, Georgia. At one point, Thomas
thought he saw gold and climbed the wall to investigate. He
fell, fracturing and dislocating a bone in one foot. Chitwood
ran to get help. The Sheriff was contacted and mobilized the
Bartow County Rescue Squad, which carried out the evacuation
of the victim.
REFERENCE: Ed., "Bartowan Injures Foot in Fall While
Exploring Caves", The Daily Tribune (Cartersville, GA),
November 19, 1990; Family Living, p. 4.
ONESQUETHAW CAVE, NY
December 1
Bf Flood
At about 3:15 p.m. on Saturday, December 1, a group of five
cavers from Syracuse University entered Onesquethaw Cave,
about ten miles southwest of Albany, New York. These were
Scott Baisch (23), Lynn Cowan (24), Nick Springer (20), Peter
Bowie (20), and Laura Selicaro (20). The weather was clear
and the streambed leading to the entrance was dry. The cave
consists of 4,500 feet of mapped passage; an initial 500 feet of
walking passage becomes a low, muddy crawl, finally yielding
to a series of tall chambers. There are numerous twisting side
passages with ceiling heights of 1-1/2 to 20 feet. At the back
is a water-filled passage that connects to nearby Jordan Cave.
About 15 minutes into the cave, they reached the Second
Room, near the end of the walking section, and passed a scout
group which was practicing belayed climbing. The scout group
exited the cave a little after 4 p.m. with the stream still dry.
After a change of clothes, the scout leader returned to find
water over one foot deep flowing into the entrance. He went to
a nearby house and called the Albany County Sheriff, and
cavers were alerted at around 4:40 p.m.
Emergency personnel responded quickly and it was
determined that a beaver dam had collapsed about two miles
upstream, at Lawson Lake, creating the flood. Resources were
mobilized and heavy equipment was used to repair the beaver
dam and build a second dam just downstream. Pumps (3,000
gallons per minute) would then try to lower the water level
behind the second dam to insure its stability.
At 5:45 p.m. a group, which included open-water divers,
entered and found the crawl at the end of the walking passage
to be sumped. A certified cave diver arrived at 6:45 p.m. He
and his equipment sherpas entered. He was able to penetrate
the first crawl. About this time, efforts upstream began to pay
off and the water level began to drop, unsumping the crawl.
Meanwhile, cavers evaluated the dam construction and found
that hay bales were being used. At 8:05 p.m., the rescue team
was withdrawn from the cave and the Sheriff was informed that
the dam was considered unsafe. There were out by 9:05 p.m.
At 10 p.m. the group stranded in the cave noticed the water
level dropping. They were getting cold, and as soon as it
looked safe, headed out, reaching the surface at 11:22 p.m.
They were taken to a nearby local hospital and treated for
hypothermia.
REFERENCES:
1) Mark McGuire, "Five Explorers Escape from Flooded Cave
in New Scotland", Albany Times-Union, December 2, 1990,
page B-1.
2) Nan Clements "2 Newark Explorers Survive Cave Flood",
News-Journal (Wilmington, Delaware), December 3, 1990.
4)
Thom Engel, "The Onesquethaw Cave Incident",
Northeastern Caver, March 1991, pp. 6-9.
5) Paul Rubin, "Analysis of the Onesquethaw Cave Rescue",
Ibid., p. 10-11.
COMMENTS: Beaver dams don't fail--it appears that someone
was illegally tampering it in a protected wetland area; the water

---------- Page 24 ----------
had also suddenly risen in the cave on the two prior weekends.
After the rescue, the temporary dams were removed and the
beaver dam left open; this presumably removed the threat of
such flooding.
NATURAL WELL, AL
December6
Be - Equipment Failure
On Thursday, December 6, a group of six cavers went for an
evening of pit-bopping at Natural Well in Alabama. A 600-foot
rope was rigged so that it afforded two ropes in the pit. After
doing the pit once or twice, one caver went home, and the rest
decided to tour the cave at the bottom. With that done, they
began to exit with Kurt Butefish and Toni Blankenship going up
first; Bob Caraway was outside, having stayed on top to guard
the rope.
Butefish made it up but when Blankenship was 20 feet from
the top, and against the wall, her chest roller seized on the
nylon webbing safety to one ascender. It wouldn't budge, so
she yelled to those on top--no answer. A yell to those on the
bottom alerted John Brown, who started up the other rope to
help. Brown was able to move his rope close to Blankenship
but neither the pin nor the webbing would budge.
Repositioning himself, he applied maximum force and the
webbing popped free. They continued out.
REFERENCE: Toni Blankenship, "Not Just Another Night at
Natural Well", Huntsville Grotto Newsletter, May-June 1991,
p. 14.
COMMENTS: Webbing running through a chest roller is not
really a good idea--webbing is far less abrasion resistant than
rope since it is woven and all strands come to the surface. A
little abrasion causes much greater loss of strength than with a
sheath rope.
BULLIS HOLE, TX
December 13
AAc - Caver Fall
Thursday, December 13, a group of four prepared to enter a
cave on Camp Bullis, an Army training facility on the outskirts
of San Antonio, Texas. One was Murray Elison III (40), a
sergeant in the Army, while the other three were an employee
of the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife, a University of
Texas graduate student, and a civilian employee of Camp Bullis.
Their intention was to conduct research on an endangered
salamander species.
The entrance is a vertical drop with the initial rectangular
opening some eight by five feet, with a perfection in dimensions
that makes it appear to have been man-modified. The entrance
drop falls 12-15 feet to a ledge where the pit continues with
dimensions of two to three feet diameter in a twisting fashion
decorated with rock projections until it suddenly opens to
widths of 20-30 feet. The total depth is in excess of 100 feet.
They rigged at the ledge to a stemple (nine-foot length of
telephone pole) set across the opening. To this was fixed a
cable ladder and a blue, dynamic rope. The sergeant descended
first, reportedly slipping free for 10 or 15 feet, and then yelled
up that he had a snarl in the rope. Saying that he was getting
off rope to pass the snarl, he then yelled in fear and fell the rest
of the way to the bottom of the pit.
The others went for help. A rescuer arrived and descended
the drop only a little more than an hour later. The sergeant lay,
sprawled and deformed, under the coil of excess rescuer rope;
his skin was cold and bluish, he had no pulse and had already
begun to rigor. His pupils were dilated, the irises were milky
and dry. He was dead. The body was hauled out soon after.
REFERENCES:
1) Vicky Smith, "Tragedy at Bullis Hole Cave", The Texas
Caver, February 1991, p. 21-23.
2) Kelly Shannon, "Army Soldier Falls to Death in Cave",
Associated Press in Commonwealth-Journal (Somerset,
Kentucky), December 16, 1990.
Various other newspapers.
COMMENTS: This is a bit strange. If there were a snarl in
the rope, surely one would not get off rope to deal with it-you
would pull it up to you and work on it. What purpose did the
cable ladder play? Was it for climbing in the narrow chimney
and the rope for use in the lower part where it suddenly got
larger? Could the soldier have been descending the ladder and
released his hold on it to undo a snarl in the rope? Elison had
reportedly been on "similar expeditions" before, but "had not
assisted the salamander researchers before". Did he know what
this pit involved? Is it possible that the ladder was the total
means of descent and ascent, and the rope just a belay? The
others were reportedly "only modestly qualified as cavers". It
doesn't sound like a belay was involved.
AGUA CALIENTE CAVE, AZ
December 31
Alec - Lost, Equipment Failure, Caver Fall
On Monday, December 31 at about 11 a.m., Kevin Sears (21)
and a companion (male, similar age), entered Agua Caliente
Cave in the western foothills of the Santa Rita Mountains south
of Tucson, Arizona. The cavers each had a flashlight, and they
had enough 1/2 inch polypropylene rope to rig the Loop Pit.
They were dressed in jeans, short-sleeved shirts and tennis shoes
and they had no head protection. The dry, dusty cave is warm
(72 degrees F). Both had prior experience in the cave, having
explored together counter-clockwise around the Loop as far as
the White Sand (Lake) Room.
This trip, they entered the upper entrance, and took about
eight minutes to get to the 40-foot Loop Pit, going clockwise.
They rigged the rope and descended. The trip continued
clockwise to the White Sand Room. Unfortunately, neither

---------- Page 25 ----------
caver recognized the room and could not find the route they had
explored on the previous trip which would have allowed them
to exit without further rope work. At 1 p.m., they gave up and
returned to the Loop Pit.
1:30 p.m., Sears attempted the hand-over-hand ascent. He
was able to get near the top, but at that point, reached a section
of smooth flowstone and lost his footing. Hanging by his
hands, he lost his grip and fell.
Sears was not substantially injured by the fall, so he tried the
ascent again. At the same place he again lost his footing and
grip and fell. As in the first fall, he covered his head with his
arms to avoid head injury. Still, this time he was injured; he
was in great pain and found himself unable to get to his feet.
Sears' companion ascended, exited the cave and reached a
phone at about 3 p.m. Authorities were notified and at around
7 p.m. the Southern Arizona Rescue Association (SARA) was
called out. Local cavers were called between 7:30 and 8:30
p.m. Rescuers began to arrive on the scene and Sears was
diagnosed as having a broken upper leg bone (femur) and
possible broken pelvis. He was strapped to a backboard and
given an IV. No food, water, or other medication was
administered.
The cave was rigged for hauling in four places--the Loop Pit,
the climb into the Register Room, the Beer Can Slide, and the
climb out to the lower entrance. The victim was further
belayed for all but 50 feet of the route between the Loop Pit
and the bottom of the climb to the Register Room.
At 11:15 p.m., Sears was hauled up the Loop Pit and
transferred to a Stokes Litter; he was brought to the surface at
2 a.m. and carried by helicopter to the University Medical
Center at 2:30 a.m. At the hospital he was treated for abrasions
and contusions, but found to have no broken bones.
REFERENCE: Henry Schneiker, Personal Communication,
January 2, 1991, 2 pages.
COMMENTS: A bit later into the evening there would have
been far fewer able rescuers, as this was New Year's Eve.
SCUBA
PEACOCK SPRING, FL
April 9
AAd - Drowning
On Tuesday, April 9, a group of three entered Peacock
Spring III, a popular cave diving site in Florida. They were a
man (53), his ten-year-old son, and an adult associate. The two
adults had become cavern certified in late 1988. The associate
had subsequently become cave certified, but the other man had
no further cave or cavern diving experience.
The associate led the way into the cavern zone, tying the end
of the guideline to a ledge at a depth of 25 feet. Shortly after,
a silt-out occurred and the leader, thinking they were all
together, reeled up the line as they exited, untying it at the
ledge. Above this, they hit clear water and realized the 53-
year-old was not with them. A search was attempted but was
not successful. The body was found later--it reportedly
appeared that fruitless efforts had been made by the victim to
find the exit.
REFERENCE:
1) Ed., "Peacock III Claims Life of Certified Cavern Diver",
Underwater Speleology 17 (2), p. 7.
2) Ed., "Think It Can't Happen to Us? Think Again", Ibid.
COMMENTS: The dive was ill-conceived. Cave diving is
extremely dangerous. With the training received in obtaining
Cave Certification (NSS, CDS or NACD) one has a reasonable
safety margin. The 53-year-old and his son, who had no
training at all, should not have been on the dive.
The victim's lack of experience was reflected in his
equipment--he had a snorkel, a fairly heavy weightbelt, wrist
lanyards on his lights, and no back-up reel. The latter
prevented him from conducting a systematic search--the line
from a backup reel can be tied and a "home-base" established
from which to conduct your search for the exit.
The victim did have adequate light though he had turned
them off prior to drowning, probably in hopes of seeing light
from the entrance or from his companions.
Depth also played no factor--the body was recovered at -25
feet depth and the maximum depth was -65 feet. However,
"most exposure-suit compression takes place in the first 20 feet
of descent. Such rapid suit compression easily leads to loss of
buoyancy control among out-of-practice divers and,
consequently, to silt-outs as well.
The site was poorly chosen for novice diving. Peacock III is
reported to usually have a coating of light, feathery silt, making
it a site only for "advanced" cave divers. Avoiding the deadly
silt-outs is a matter of proper equipment and weighting, as well
as body control gained from diving experience.
TROY SPRING, FL
April 14
AAd - Drowning
On Saturday, April 14, two divers entered Troy Spring in
Lafayette County, Florida, a popular open-water training site.
Neither diver had been through formal cave or cavern training.
The two had voiced their intention to penetrate a very small
cave opening at the -80-foot level and associates had tried to
dissuade them, to no avail. The divers had a spool of
monofilament fishing line which they reeled out as a guide line.
As they proceeded down into the spring, the strong current
caused the lead diver's regulator to free-flow. Their efforts

---------- Page 26 ----------
resulted in rapid breathing which rapidly depleted both their air
supplies. They made their way some 55 feet into the cave
before the lead diver ran low on air. His companion did not
have an octopus, SO they had to share a single second stage,
passing it back and forth. Meanwhile, the current carried them
back toward the entrance, entangling them in their line. They
soon became helpless, so thoroughly tangled that they both
drowned, within sight of the surface. The second diver still had
1700 pounds of air left, but could not reach his second stage to
use it. When the body recovery took place, it took 10 minutes
to cut them free of the tangled line.
REFERENCE: Ed., "Double Drowning Closes Troy",
Underwater Speleology, 17 (2), p. 5.
COMMENTS: The divers had one small light apiece. They
were unused to such activity and used air at an unusual rate.
The leader failed to turn back on the use of 1/3 of his air; they
used a "notoriously poor substitute for a proper guideline."
"Although 80 feet is still above the depth at which serious
narcosis usually occurs, many divers are at least somewhat
impaired at this depth. Additionally, the exertion resulting
from an inexperienced diver's attempt to swim into a strong
current can easily bring about the onset of narcosis at depths
shallower than that at which it would otherwise occur."
These divers may have been saved by proper training, but it
occurs to this observer that training is no substitute for good
sense. Some people simply should not become cave divers.
DIEPOLDER SINK #2, FL
May 11
AAd - Drowning
On the evening of May 11, two divers entered Diepolder
Sink #2, in Hernando County, Florida, one of the largest
known underwater caves, including depths in excess of 300 feet.
One was a 25-year-old man from Hudson, Florida, who had
completed a cave diver training course in December 1989. He
and his more-experienced buddy planned to visit the
downstream portion of the cave; it was his first dive at this site.
Visibility was significantly reduced by recent, heavy rains.
Two other teams of divers were to enter a bit later.
They followed the guideline through the entrance restriction
and encountered near-zero visibility at the Junction Room.
They took the downstream guideline, breaking into clear water
on the upper circuit line. They corrected a buoyancy problem,
signalled OK to each other, and began a slow descent on the
lower circuit line, heading into the cave.
The lower line lies at a depth of -250 feet. Halfway through
the dive, his partner noticed when the 25-year-old momentarily
dropped below the line, then continued at a faster pace. This
line completes a circuit, taking them back to the Junction Room
at a depth of -210 feet. When they reached this point, they had
re-entered the silted water. The 25-year-old suddenly lost his
grip on the guideline, became disoriented and swam back down
cave. This was not noticed by his buddy or by the other two
diving teams which had been surveying and were now exiting.
He reached the downstream Ballroom and after some
wandering found a marked line. His buddy, meanwhile, had
begun decompressing in the entrance basin, but became
concerned and searched the basin at his 30-foot stop. Later, he
and another diver again dove to the Junction Room but found
no trace of the victim.
The body was found the following day by recovery specialists
after a 25-minute search, on the bottom, at -241 feet. It took
three teams seven hours to complete the body recovery.
REFERENCE: Dustin Cless, "Cave Diver Drowns at
Diepolder Sink Number Two", Underwater Speleology, (3),
p. 6.
COMMENTS: The victim had logged 75 cave dives and was
reportedly known for pushing himself with a desire to emulate
more experienced divers. The loss of contact with the guideline
was the principal factor in the incident but this, and the


********** resulting disorientation, may be due to the depth of the dive:
"Using compressed air below 130 feet severely impairs most
divers. Even more pronounced effects are guaranteed below
200 feet. Beset with narcosis and the accumulated carbon
dioxide that results from the unusually strenuous respiration
required at depth, the victim apparently succumbed to depth-
induced blackout. Slowly losing buoyancy, he dropped
headfirst some 40 feet before hitting bottom. Recovery divers
observed no signs of struggle; the victim's mask remained in
place." It can be assumed from this description that he drowned
after losing consciousness.
It appeared the victim was setting a personal depth record
and, excited about seeing new cave, extended past the planned
turnaround at 2000 psi air reserve. Using mixed gas might
have given him a better chance of survival.
OTTER SPRING, FL
May 19
AAd - Drowning
On Saturday, May 19, divers visited Otter Spring in Gilchrist
County in north Florida. They were an International Diving
Educators Association (IDEA) Instructor Trainer and four newly
certified open-water divers, Kenneth Ives (25), Ron Welch,
Allyn Welch (25), and Chris Gallup (22). Otter Spring is a
simple basin with a "very advanced" cave leading from the
bottom at a depth of -40 feet. The instructor repeatedly
admonished the four to stay out of the cave but allowed them to
enter the water with lights, violating park rules.
The dive began and the group encountered the cave entrance
where the instructor signalled them not to enter. The instructor
continued with the dive and Ron Welch followed. Ives,
however, was apparently determined to enter the cave. Gallup
and Allyn Welch tried to dissuade him but could not, so they
followed, hoping to keep him out of trouble.

---------- Page 27 ----------
The surfaces of the cave are coated with fine, feathery silt
which was immediately stirred up by the three divers, who
became disoriented and after awhile began to run out of air.
On the surface, other divers noticed the absence of the three.
The commotion alerted Woody Jasper, an expert cave diver who
was attending a company picnic at the park. Perhaps he was
planning a dive, for he also happened to have his gear with
him. He quickly suited up and entered the water.
Gallup and Welch, meanwhile, had lost trace of Ives. When
one ran out of air, they shared until it was all gone.
Fortunately, they had encountered a small air pocket and this
sustained them for a short period before it, too, was exhausted
of oxygen. The two lost consciousness.
Jasper quickly found the two in the air pocket. Thinking that
one of them moved, showing life, he purged some air into the
pocket. Neither victim showed response, or reacted to the offer
of a shared octopus, so he pulled one down and towed him at
all speed to the surface where other company employees began
to administer CPR. Jasper returned to the air pocket where the
second victim had recovered consciousness; he accepted the
octopus and was escorted to the surface.
Jasper again returned to the cave and found the body of the
third victim, who had apparently drowned some 20-30 minutes
earlier. The unconscious victim, Welch, responded to the CPR,
but, at the last report, remained in critical condition in intensive
care in a hospital.
REFERENCES:
1) Ed., "Woody Jasper's Courage Makes Possible the 'Miracle
at Otter'", Underwater Speleology, 17 (3), p. 5.
2) Norma Wagner, "Expert Cave Diver Saves Two Novices; a
Third Dies", St. Petersburg Times, May 22, 1990, p. 1, 14A.
COMMENTS: The three had no proper equipment or training,
nor did they do any planning. The culprit here, however, is
simply human psychology. It is obvious that some, perhaps all
of us, will at some time deliberately take a life-threatening risk
on the pure hope or chance that fate, or whatever, will sustain
them. Sometimes we are not sustained.
EAGLE'S NEST SINK, FL
August
AAd - Drowning
In August, two divers entered Eagle's Nest Spring in
Hernando County, Florida. One was Brent Potts, a "highly
experienced" cave diver. He apparently became separated from
his partner, and was found unconscious, drowned, at -200 feet
without a second stage in his mouth. They were using
compressed air.
REFERENCE: Marty Moore and Mike Poskey, "We Are
Dying", The National Association for Cave Diving Journal,
October-November-December 1990, p. 74.
COMMENTS: "Diving on air, a person at -150 feet is
decidedly mentally impaired. That impairment is increased at
-200 feet. Moreover, irrespective of the other gases involved,
oxygen 'can become toxic at depth.'"
"Experienced Cave divers continue to die in accidents that
can be primarily attributed to depth. One diver in Uno Spring
in 1979, two in Eagle's Nest in 1982, one in Little Dismal Sink
in 1988, one in Diepolder Sink in 1990, and Brent Potts in
Eagle's Nest in 1990. six good divers in eleven years."
DEVIL'S DEN, FL
October 7
AAd - Drowning
On Sunday, October 7, a group of three divers entered
Devil's Den in Levy County, Florida. They were Ken
Kroslowitz, Chris Marcott and Charles "Buddy Pues (55). Pues
was apparently rescue certified for open water but had no cave
or cavern training. He had dived at the site two weeks prior.
At around noon, the three did a dive. Only Pues had brought
a second set of tanks and went down a second time at about
2:15 p.m. He proceeded through the cavern area and about 200
feet into the cave area, at about 70 feet depth, he apparently
stirred up some silt and ended up in a low, bedding-plane
passage about 2 feet high, where he ran out of air and drowned.
The body recovery crew found "clawing" marks in the silt.
REFERENCES:
1) Kelly Brady, "Recovery Report", October 8, 1990,
unpublished, 2 pages.
2) Karen Voyles, "Man Drowns in Cave After Ignoring Diving
Conditions", The Gainsville Sun, October 1990.
3) Ed., "Deaths in Mexico and Florida", Underwater
Speleology, 17 (5), September/October 1990, p. 4.
SAC ACTUN, MEXICO
October17
AAd - Drowning
At 10:30 a.m., a group of eight divers and one tank sherpa
arrived at the parking lot six kilometers north of Tulum, in
Yucatan, Mexico. It was the fifth day of a six-day group
diving affair. All were cave certified. A detailed sketch of the
cave system was made and the dive plan was discussed. The
plan was to enter the Sac Actun Cenote, traverse the cave and
exit the Grand Cenote, a trip of 22 minutes, reaching depths of
40 feet. It was explained that about 280 feet "upstream" from
Sac Actun they would traverse a temporary, 70-foot gap line
with a pink direction-line marker at the start which connected
with the permanent line going "downstream" to the Grand
Cenote. The lead divers would be installing this temporary
line. The group would then retrace their path back to Sac
Actun; they were in two teams of four and the second team
would reel up the temporary line. At Sac Actun they would
recalculate "thirds" and take another passage leading to a third
cenote via a formation room and a loop in the passage.

---------- Page 28 ----------
The first leg proceeded well, taking 24 minutes. At the
Grand Cenote, a second line was attached and strung out into
the large "cavern" zone, to help guide them back to the cave
passage. All had started the dive with 3000 psi in their double
80 cubic foot tanks and now had 23-2400 psi left with one
having 2600.
They spent 15 minutes on the surface and the plan for the
remainder of the dive was reviewed twice, again reminding
them of the cave layout with a sketch on a dive slate. When
one member was in doubt, the plan was reviewed a third time.
Everyone agreed that they understood.
They started back, but quickly diverted to one side of the
cavern zone to observe a crocodile skeleton. A second delay
occurred when a member of the first team dropped his/her mask
and a member of the second team retrieved it. They regrouped
and continued into the cave zone, the second group about 100
feet behind, reeling in the cavern zone line.
At the 70-foot gap, the first-team leader detached the reel,
sending his three teammates ahead. The second team arrived
moments later. Three second-team divers started to swim across
the gap while the fourth was given the reel and signals were
given for him to reel it in while the first-team leader swam
ahead to catch up with his group.
The first-team leader caught up with his group at the other
end of the 70-foot gap (the pink direction-line marker) and
made the required sharp left turn, leading toward Sac Actun.
He looked back, saw one second-team member following, and
the rest arriving at the pink marker. However, when they
arrived at Sac Actun, they could see no following lights.
It was assumed that this was due to the second team suffering
a jammed reel; they recalculated "thirds" and proceeded on the
third leg of the session, the traverse to the third cenote. A gap
line was laid and they swam to the third cenote. The leader
was uneasy about the second group and inquired of the others
as to the last time they had seen the second group. They agreed
the last time was at the pink marker.
The three were told to stay there and the first-team leader
went back. At Sac Actun, the second team was not in sight.
At the pink marker (the 70-foot gap) he found the gap-line reel
had been replaced. He proceeded to the Grand Cenote and
found no one. He returned to the third cenote, got his group,
and returned to Sac Actun. He then headed in alone, toward
Grand Cenote, for one more look.
Meanwhile, the reel diver on the second team had gotten
about 1/3 of the line reeled in when the leader came back and
signalled for him to replace it. He did so and they swam back
to the pink marker, where the leader turned right and headed
deeper into the cave system. The other divers followed,
including the one who had started to follow the first team. At
one point, the leader stopped to check his air supply, then
continued. After traversing some 1000 feet, the leader stopped
and asked, via his slate, why they hadn't met the first team.
They decided to turn back.
One diver still had 1500 psi, the others were down to 1000.
Shortly, they observed a "snap and gap" line heading to the
right. Hoping this was the way to the third cenote, they took
it but when 100 feet in found a line arrow pointing the direction
they came from, retreated and continued out the main guideline.
One diver's fin strap popped off and there was a delay while
his companions helped with it. The fins had been properly
taped, but were of the new adjustable type. Stress increased--
they had not seen a direction arrow for some time. The two
bringing up the rear were now swimming faster and passed their
companions, stirring up some silt and disappearing from sight.
One of the two who were now last ran out of air and began to
share with the other. They were about 600 feet from Sac
Actun. The fin strap popped off again and they abandoned it,
making swimming more difficult. Two hundred feet later, they
dropped a video camera and kept going.
The first-team leader headed toward the pink marker on the
way to Grand Cenote and saw three lights heading toward him.
As he approached the first two lights, he saw that they were
sharing air. These two gave hand signals--big trouble behind.
They had just passed the faster two, obviously out of air.
The first-team leader swam into the cave and discovered a
body dangling limp from an air pocket in the ceiling. He tried
pulling it to administer air, but it was too buoyant. Pulling off
his regulator, he purged it, sending fresh air into the pocket.
Sticking his hand into the air pocket, he felt the diver's face to
find it still warm and the diver gulping for air. He placed his
long hose regulator second stage into the air pocket and the
diver responded, grabbing at it.
After a minute or so of breathing, the diver dropped down
from the air pocket. The first-team leader pried the victim's
face mask from his left hand and put it in his right hand; the
victim put it on and cleared it. Firmly taking the victim's right
hand, the leader escorted him the 150 feet to the surface.
The two second team divers sharing air had just made it to
the surface on the last of their shared air. Since another diver
was still missing, the first-team leader and a second first-team
diver returned to the cave. They found the second victim,
twenty feet beyond the first, on the floor face up, regulator out
of his mouth. They pushed one of their regulators into his
mouth with no response. Each diver grabbed an arm and pulled
the victim as fast as they could to Sac Actun Cenote. The
victim was given mouth-to-mouth resuscitation for five minutes,
but it was futile. He was dead.
REFERENCE: Steve Gerrard, "Cave Diver Drowns in Sac
Actun", The National Association for Cave Diving Journal,
October-November-December 1990, p. 71-73.
COMMENTS: Everyone was fully cave trained. The deceased
had logged 53 cave dives. A continuous guide line was
maintained throughout the dive. The only apparent factor in the
incident was disorientation, possibly due to unfamiliarity with
the cave. I would speculate that in a weightless environment
such as this, that even closing your eyes for a short period
during which your body chanced to rotate, would be enough to

---------- Page 29 ----------
bring complete disorientation. In any case, this well-equipped,
well-planned, intelligently carried out dive, by well-trained and
experienced divers, resulted in a fatality. Perhaps cave divers
lose sight of how dangerous a sport this is. Perhaps a rule that
every diver, before a dive, must turn to each of his companions
and say, "Well, it was nice knowing you--I may not see you on
the surface alive again", might serve to remind them.
It appears that only one diver may have been confused. Two
of the survivors stated that they "still understood the dive plan
but were lulled into the following-a-leader syndrome.
The rigging of the cave was obviously confusing. The
following week it was redone so that no gap now exists between
cenotes and pushing further into the cave at the old pink marker
now requires a gap line.
I should also say that the plan was rather complicated. Under
partial narcosis or dive euphoria/panic, it is obviously difficult
to remember anything--keep it simple.
PEACOCK SPRINGS, FL
November 4
AAd - Drowning
On Sunday, November 4, Darden Davis (46) entered the
Olsen Sink Entrance to the Peacock Springs Cave System in
Suwannee County in north Florida. Davis was an experienced
and certified cave diver, and was equipped with dual-manifolded
104 cubic-foot doubles and an 80-cubic-foot stage bottle. He
proceeded into the upstream tunnel, with which he was
reportedly familiar, on a legal, solo dive.
His body was found 150 feet from Olsen Sink. The 80 was
empty, but there was 1200 psi in the 104's. The valve
regulator (SPG) had been turned off. When the equipment was
tested later, it was found that there was a second stage free-flow
malfunction. This may be the reason it had been turned off.
"Davis was presumably then trying to exit and bumped the
other valve handle to the backup regulator causing it to shut off
or he might have only cranked it open a bit initially and as tank
pressure dropped, it no longer was able to allow the backup
regulator to function.
It is hypothesized that, under the stress of breathing from a
poorly performing backup regulator, the deceased may have
forgotten about having turned the primary regulator off (which
would cause his SPG to read zero). He might have concluded
a dead SPG and a hard-drawing regulator meant that his doubles
were nearly dry, and thus have resorted to his stage bottle."
On the stage bottle a single hose regulator with two second
stages was attached, one was found to be sticking. As the
deceased tried to exit the cave system in an emergency, there
could have been air lost from the second stage not being used.
In any case, it was his last dive. The Florida State Parks have
since been closed to solo diving.
REFERENCES:
1) Ed., "Cave Diver Drowns in Olsen Sink", The National
Association for Cave Diving Journal, October-November-
December 1990, p. 70.
2) Ed., "Accident Closes Peacock Springs to Solo Cave
Diving", Underwater Speleology, November/December 1990,
p. 3.
NOTICE:
We are proposing a 10-year collective issue of American
Caving Accidents with essays, incident reports and Safety
Committee articles. Please make any suggestions,
complaints, and/or new information on old incident reports
as soon as possible. This will cover 1981 through 1990.

---------- Page 30 ----------
National Speleological Society
Accident/Incident Report Form
Date of Accident/Incident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name(s) of Person(s)
Age
Sex
Experience
Involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving Accidents"
is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
( ) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident/Incident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
( ) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver, weather, equipment, clothing, etc.).
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident/incident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident/incident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( ) Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose copies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
Time:
State
Zip
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 32 ----------
"CAVERS SERVING CAVERS
304-772-5049 or 304-772-3074
