
---------- Page 1 ----------
TVNN news
American Caving Accidents
2007-2008

---------- Page 2 ----------
American Caving Accidents
2007-2008
Editor
American Caving Accidents
Ray Keeler
26406 N. 43rd Avenue
February 2010
Phoenix, AZ 85083
Features
aca@caves.org
ACA 2007-2008
Caver Input and American Caving Accidents
Review Committee
An Overview of the 2007 and 2008 Incidents
Bonny Armstrong
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics, 1986 - 2008
George Dasher
John LaMar Cole
Previously Unreported
Mark Minton
Bill Putnam
Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Forrest Wilson
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Deadline: The NSS News is distributed the
last week of the month preceding the date
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
of publication. Advertisements, articles, and
announcements should be sent to the NSS
Previously Unreported
News, P.O. Box 879, Angels Camp, CA
95222 by the 15th of the month, six weeks
Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
before the month of issue (for example,
material for March should be submitted by
2007 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
January 15).
2008 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
The NSS News (ISSN-0027-7010) is
published monthly, with the Members
Manual and American Caving Accidents
2007 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
published as additional issues by the
National Speleological Society Inc., 2813
2008 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
Cave Ave., Huntsville AL, 35810-4431.
The National Cave Rescue Commission
Periodicals Postage Paid at Huntsville, AL
and additional mailing offices.
Tel: (256) 852-1300
Fax: (256) 851-9241
Email: inss@caves.org
www.caves.org
Regular membership in the NSS is $40 per
Contributing Authors and Photographers
year. Subscriptions to the NSS News are
$27 per year; individual copies are $3.00
Peter Bosted
each. Copies of American Caving
Jeff Bozanic
Accidents are also available from the NSS
Shawn Thomas
Bookstore for $5.00 plus postage. Contact
the Huntsville office for membership
applications, subscriptions, orders, or for
replacement of issues missing or damaged
in the mail.
Copyright © 2009
by the National Speleological
Front Cover
Society Inc.
Matt Covington's lead climb into virgin passage in Lechuguilla Cave.
All rights reserved. No portion of
moments before the accident. Photograph Copyright © 2008, Peter
this publication may be reproduced
Bosted.
without the written permission of
Back Cover
the National Speleological Society.
Postmaster:
Top: Matt Covington at the top of the Liberty Bell pitch during the self
Send address changes to
rescue. Photograph Copyright © 2008, Shawn Thomas
National Speleological Society
Lower: X-ray of Matt Covington's arm after pin and screw placements.
2813 Cave Ave.
Staples show in lower Xray. Photograph Copyright © 2008, Matt
Huntsville AL 35810-4431
Covington.
Volume 68, Number 2, Part 2
SPELEOLOGICAL
/

---------- Page 3 ----------
Caver Input and American Caving Accident Incidents
Ray Keeler
Welcome to another issue of American Caving Accidents. The
intent of the publication is to inform, educate and promote safe
caving. A primary, contributing portion of this publication is
with caver input. After all, those people reading this now, are
part of the most organized caver communications network in
North America. To this group, I would like to offer two
concepts and request your activism and input.
First, several of the incidents reported in this issue were
summarized based on public news media accounts when no
caver input was available. Later, when the cavers involved
either sent in reports or were contacted for additional
information, the summaries were substantially corrected to more
accurately reflect the events that took place. Please, submit
incident information. The online form can be found at
http://www.caves.org/pub/aca/acaform.html It is not enough to
assume someone else will take care of reporting the accident or
incident. Your perspective is important.
An Overview of the 2007 and 2008 Incidents
American Caving Accidents (ACA) is the journal of record for
caving accidents and safety incidents in North America. This
issue contains reports for incidents that occurred in 2007 and
2008. Following the custom of previous issues, the reports have
been separated into two general categories: regular caving and
cave diving, and then further classified by result or outcome and
by causes and contributing factors. The cave diving incidents are
grouped separately, and an overview is presented at the end of
this section.
Since 1994, we have used the category "difficulty on rope" to
encompass such problems as becoming stuck at the lip of a pit,
clothing or hair caught in the rappel device, jammed rappel
safety, or simply becoming unable to ascend or descend. Our
intent is to better describe these situations, which might
otherwise be lumped under "stuck", "trapped and/or stranded",
or perhaps "equipment problem".
In reporting the number of incidents versus NSS membership
totals, only caving incidents involving fatalities, injury, or aid
were included. The reader should also be aware that the
members of the National Speleological Society constitute only a
portion of the population of active cavers. Further, not all
incidents are reported to ACA. Therefore, these numbers should
not be considered reliable indicators of accident rates for caving
or used to draw conclusions about the relative degree of risk or
danger involved in caving.
Caving-Related Incidents are grouped separately from Caving
Incidents based on two primary criteria. First, if the incident
location was reported as a cave when in actuality it is not a cave,
then the incident is reported as caving-related. Examples are
mines and rock shelters. Second, if the person did not
intentionally enter the cave or go to see the cave, then it is a
caving-related incident. For example, if the person was working
near an entrance and something happened to cause an incident,
then it is Caving Related. There are two of these in this issue.
Also included in this category, would be sending an email to
aca@caves.org with information you have heard. I usually write
back asking to whom contact should be made for additional data.
The Cave Rescue Forum on CaveChat on the NSS web page is
also an excellent media for better understanding the events.
CaveChat is at http://www.forums.caves.org/
Second, please do not be embarrassed about writing up and
sending in your own incident report. We all make mistakes and
we all learn about this activity called caving. Some cavers have
told me about incidents that would be very useful to relay to the
general community, but were unenthused about actually sitting
down and writing about the event.
I have found that in taking the time to put these events onto
paper (or into the computer), I learn so much more about the
sequences of events, the causes, and things that could have been
done to better the outcome.
NSS Membership and
Number of Incidents
Year
Members
Incidents
Only incidents resulting in aid, injury, or fatality are
included. Membership figures include all classes of
membership.

---------- Page 4 ----------
However, if the person intentionally went to look at the cave
entrance and the person fell in, then this is a Caving Incident.
Incident Results
Cell Phones
Two incidents in 2007 and 2008 involving cell phone calls from
1000 feet underground (Longhorn Quarry, TX, caving related)
or the bottom of an open air pit (Brewers Pit, NM) provided
substantially different outcomes than if the cell phone calls had
not connected. It has been common knowledge that cell phones
do not work underground. However, in the Longhorn Quarry
incident, the youths, while lost in the quarry's maze, stumbled
on a place where they were able to make a connnection and call
out for help. One possibility for this ia that, being a quarry,
wiring for lights and communication may have been placed and
the youths came upon one of these locations.
The Brewers Pit incident is truly amazing. The three young
men did not tell anyone where they were going or when they
would be back, Their vehicle was parked on a dirt backroad in
the El Malpais wilderness, some 30 miles from anywhere, and
the pit was over a mile from the car. To further complicate a
search effort, if the vehicle had been found without the cell
phone connection, there are dozens of cave and pit entrances
within a one mile radius of the vehicle. After loosing their only
ascender in a crevice the men were able to call for help while
standing on the breakdown pile at the bottom of the pit. The call
basically saved their lives.
Fatalities
On average, there are three or four fatal, non-cave diving
accidents in North America each year. When incidents involving
untrained and inadequately equipped spelunkers are excluded,
the average drops to one or two fatal accidents per year.
There were five reported non diving fatalities in 2007 and 2008,
and four caving-related fatalities. Only two of these involved
cavers with experience.
I
In the US, "cavers" generally consider "spelunkers" to be
people who have no real knowledge or understanding of caves
and caving safety, but who decide to enter a cave anyway,
usually without proper equipment.
The fatalities included someone swimming into a low air space
until there was no air space (Deadman's Cave), a tourist being
killed by rockfall while on a tourist trail in Rio Camuy, Puerto
Rico, a tourist on an underground tubing trip drowning in a cave
in Belize, a medical emergency in Fort Stanton Cave, and a pot
hunter whose in-cave trench collapsed on him in Kentucky.
The caving related incidents include a farmer who was killed
when he fell into a pit while clearing weeds on his farm in Vera
Cruz, Mexico. Also, a man living in No Name Tunnel in
Colorado died of unknown causes, and a woman who had been
drinking drowned while swimming in Wayne's World in
Florida. A diver in a submerged mine died of a medical issue.
There were five cave diving fatalities in 2007 and six fatalities in
2008. All were in Florida.
Including the caving related incidents, these total up to 20 deaths
over the two-year period, which is not a good way for caves to
be mentioned in the news media.
Injury and Aid
Incidents in this category resulted in injury to one or more
people, who then required help from others to exit the cave
besides the group's members. While many of these incidents
involved rescue call-outs and outside assistance, others were
resolved by the cavers themselves without calling for rescue.
Caver fall incidents (16) were the primary cause of injury and
aid rescues in 2007 and 2008. No deaths resulted in the falls. At
least three falls resulted in the caver becoming trapped and
requiring extrication.
With the thousands of trips each year and the wet and sometimes
slippery conditions, it is inevitable that slips and falls will
happen. Ten trips are in this category, including Simmons-
Mingo Cave, Coon Cave, Fitton Cave, Pryor Spring Cave,
Sharps Cave, Anderson Spring Cave, Organ Cave, Cueva El
Gran Plano, Falls Cliff Cave, and Lava River Cave. The four
day Cueva El Gran Plano rescue drew international attention.
However, some of the falls in 2007 and 2008 were due to very
poor decisions. A spelunker fell while hand-over-handing down
a rope in Turtle Graveyard Cave when his dry-rotted rope broke.
Other incidents occurred when the person fell while holding a
flashlight in their hand, contributing to that person being unable
to react adequately to the situation.
Further poor decisions including not wearing helmets increased
the injury and aid statistics with the two unnamed cave incidents
in Iowa on the same day.
The other injury and aid incident of note was the ice cave
collapse in Washington near Snoqualmie Pass, where two
teenagers went into the walking-sized entrance and the ice cave
collapsed on them about 20 feet in.
Aid, No Injury
Most incidents in this category are rescues of individuals that
cavers often refer to as "spelunkers", those who are typically
poorly equipped and inexperienced, and are often stranded when
they break or lose their flashlights, run out of batteries, descend
pits hand-over-hand, or get lost. Sometimes, however, even
experienced and properly equipped cavers fall ill and need
assistance, or are trapped by rock-fall or flooded passage.
There were 16 aid with no injury trips in 2007 and 2008. Two of
these were due to off-season ice plugs discovered while doing

---------- Page 5 ----------
through trips in the Fossil Mountain Ice Cave to Wind Cave
traverse. The rest were an assortment of groups that were lost,
stranded with inadequate equipment, difficulty on rope,
exhaustion, or trapped in tight passage. The distribution
between cavers and spelunkers was about even with eight caver
and seven spelunker incidents.
Injury, No Aid
These incidents resulted in injuries ranging from scrapes and
bruises to sprained ankles and broken legs. In each case, the
victim was able to exit the cave with minimal assistance from
members of the caving party. Nine incidents are in this group,
four incidents from rock-fall and four incidents from caver fall.
The ninth incident came from someone injuring their knee in
Wayne's Cave.
The self rescue in Lechuguilla due to the climbing protection
blowing out was a significant effort by the team.
No Consequence
These incidents are typically of the "near miss" category. They
are included SO that the reader will be aware of the many things
that can go wrong on a caving trip. Examples include
carabineers or maillon links coming unscrewed while on rope,
rock-fall incidents and passage collapses not resulting in injury
or requiring aid, and individuals or groups who become lost or
stranded, but who are eventually able to find their way out or
resolve their difficulties without assistance.
There were three reports in 2007 and 2008. These included
difficulty on rope in Indian Rock Cave, rigging blowing out in
Ain't Barbwire Cave, and discovering old dynamite in Crystal
Cave.
Incident Types
Acetelyne-related
No burns, explosions, or other acetylene-related incidents were
reported for 2007-08. It may be that the wide availability of
affordable, high-quality electric headlamps has largely displaced
carbide lights in U.S. caving.
Bad Air
None of the caving accidents and incidents reported in this issue
involved bad air. However, bad air may have been a contributing
factor to the Deadman's Cave drowning.
To learn more about the dangers and signs of bad air in caves,
see Bill Mixon's article in the April 2000 ACA, and Bill Elliott's
article in the December, 1997 ACA.
Caver Fall
Falls remain the leading type of safety incident or accident in
caving, accounting for a large proportion of reported injuries and
rescues. Twenty two of the reported incidents for 2007 and 2008
involved falls. The falls included both cavers and spelunkers.
Many of the incidents could have been prevented by the use of a
belay. Cavers should consider using a belay whenever the
exposure of a climb or traverse is greater than a body length, and
a belay should always be used when climbing or descending a
cable ladder.
Cavers also fall on occasion while moving through "horizontal"
passages, accounting for a number of accidents reported in this
issue. Cavers can reduce the risk of falls by wearing sturdy boots
with lug soles and maintaining "three points of contact" while
moving through uneven terrain.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder
This category includes cavers who become stranded on rope and
require assistance, or who experience significant difficulties and
require assistance to complete their ascent or descent. The Indian
Rock Cave and Malloy's Waterfall Cave incidents are included
here. In the Coon Cave incident, a slip while rappelling caused
the person pass out and fall, thus is listed in caver fall.
Cavers involved in these incidents are often relatively
inexperienced and sometimes unfamiliar with their gear. Others
may be experienced cavers who are simply out of practice or out
of shape. Some incidents occur when cavers are unable to deal
with situations such as crossing the lip of a pit with weight on
the rope below, crossing an undercut or overhanging lip,
changing from rappel to ascent and vice versa, or climbing a
cable ladder.
Competent cavers must master their systems and know how their
equipment works. With practice, skilled cavers can perform a
change-over in less than 60 seconds. Spend time practicing; it
could save your life.
Drowning
Drowning incidents are infrequent in "dry caving," but have
occurred when cavers became trapped by flooding or when they
attempted to free-dive through sumped passages. One caver
drowned while trying to find a water blockage in Deadman's
Cave. A second person drowned during a high adventure tourist
trip in Belize.
Equipment Problem
This catch-all category includes rigging failures, slipping
ascenders, light failure, rope failure, and misuse or lack of
equipment. There were six reported incidents of this type for
2007 and 2008. In the Turtle Graveyard incident, the person was
hand-over-handing down a dry-rotted vanilla tow rope when it
broke. The Pryor Spring incident resulted in knot pulling
through a rappel ring.
Exhaustion
Exhaustion is a contributing factor in a wide variety of incidents
in 2006. Cavers became exhausted while climbing on rope,
trying to correct problems on rope, and on long trips.
Exhaustion affects the decision-making process and often leads
to incidents that are reported in other categories. The Airman's
Cave incident was a combination of exhaustion and becoming
lost.
Flooding
The lesson taught by flood entrapments is simple: pay attention
to the weather conditions. Check the forecast for the caving area,
and be alert for the possibility of flooding. If the cave is known
to flood and you do not have a clear forecast, go somewhere
else. Also, know what the weather has been for the last several
days. Some caves may experience flooding several days after a
storm event. It is just not worth the risk of entrapment, rescue,
media attention, closed caves, injury, or death. For more on the
dangers of water caves, see George Dasher's editorial in the June
2003 ACA.
The previously unreported incident in Endless Cave names
flooding as the contributing factor to being stranded.

---------- Page 6 ----------
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is usually a secondary result in the reported
incidents, occurring subsequent to cavers becoming injured,
stranded, or trapped in a cave. There were two incidents in 2007
and 2008 involving hypothermia. One of the side effects of the
Simmons-Mingo incident was that the cavers had been in the
cave for such a long period, leading to early hypothermia. One
of the unnamed cave incidents in Iowa reported that the patient
had a temperature of 85 degrees as a result of being stuck.
While this number is in question due to the lack of other


********** symptoms, remember: hypothermia can kill you all by itself.
Hypothermia also impairs your thinking and judgment, making
potentially deadly mistakes more likely.
Illness
There were no reported incidents of histoplasmosis infections, or
other infections due to caving in 2007 or 2008. There were also
no reported incidents where illness was a contributing factor to
another kind of incident.
Lost
Most of these incidents involve untrained and ill-equipped
cavers, spelunkers, or novices with little experience. Many
escalate to the "stranded" category when batteries run out or
flashlights get broken. When found, lost cavers often require
treatment for hypothermia, sometimes including hospitalization.
Cavers or spelunkers were lost in Simmons-Mingo Cave, Camps
Gulf Cave, Sharps Cave, Airman's Cave, Harrison Salt Peter
Cave, Bowden Cave, and Byers Cave. Also, several youths
were lost in Longhorn Quarry. Of the cases listed above, three
involved cavers. The other four incidents were spelunkers.
Medical Issue
Medical issues are events that happen during the caving trip.
These include heart attacks, nausea, over heating during a trip, or
crawling and injuring your knee.
The fatality in Fort Stanton is in this category. In caving related
incidents, the fatality in the flooded mine #2 incident in
Newfoundland, Canada is also here. The autopsy showed the
man had cancer that became a medical issue during the dive.
Medical issues are included with Illness in the statistics.
Rock-fall
Rock-fall incidents accounted for several serious accidents and
incidents during the reporting period, resulting in injuries and
rescues as well as one case of entrapment. The most notable
rock-fall incidents were those in which cavers were pinned or
trapped in caves.
Four rock-fall incidents involved cavers, two incidents involved
spelunkers. The seventh rock-fall incident was a tourist on an
improved trail in Rio Camuy Cave in Puerto Rico which resulted
in a fatality.
Greenhorn Cave, XTC Cave, Sarlacc Cave, and Lechuguilla
Cave all involved cavers touching or disturbing rocks. The ice
cave collapse trapping two teenagers is listed here. The pot
hunter who had an excavation trench collapse on him is also in
this category.
Stuck
Getting stuck is usually not much of a problem for experienced
cavers. Most of us have been stuck in a tight passage at some
point, and have learned that a calm head and careful movement
can usually remedy the situation. Sometimes, however,
extracting a stuck caver from a tight passage or crevice can be
extremely difficult.
As in 2006, a short fall caused all of the incidents in 2007 and
2008 involving someone getting stuck. These included Falls
Cliff Cave, Devil's Den Cave, and an unnamed cave in Iowa.
Trapped or Stranded
This category is used to describe incidents in which the caver or
cavers were prevented from exiting the cave by rock-fall, light
failure, lack of equipment, equipment failure, or other causes. In
many of the reported incidents, "spelunkers" became stranded
due to inexperience, inadequate equipment and/or poor
judgment. In two cases, unexpected ice plugs were encountered
by teams doing through trips in the fossil Mountain Ice Cave-
Wind Cave system.
Inadequate equipment for the incidents in Dunham Cave,
Rainbow Falls Cave, Brewers Pit, and Hognose Cave (caving-
related incident) led to persons becoming trapped or stranded.
The caver in Breathing Hole Cave was trapped by going down
through tight passage and not being able to get back out.
Other
This catch-all category includes sinkhole collapse, cuts by sharp
rocks, dislocated shoulders, twisted ankles and other joint
injuries, animal attacks, and other incidents not covered above,
including drug labs, explosives, or bodies found in caves. The
discovery of old dynamite in Crystal Cave is catagorised here.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics
1986-2008
Result of Incident
Result
86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
Fatality
Injury and Aid
3551214 44 2526304144
17 22 19 17 16 22 14 20 11 15 9 7815 9 9
Aid, no Injury
20 28 33 26 17 16 13 12 18 15 (13 814 12 8129 7
Injury, no Aid


********** 12 10411810428356601047
No Consequence
Total
64 64 61 72 64 66 76 67 77 56 54 47 40 47 41 36 35 40 23 26 35 25 25
Incidents
Involving
Fatality,
45 48 49 51 55 54 60 64 57 44 43 43 32 44 40 34 31 35 22 26 34 226 22
Injury, or Aid
Incident Type
Type
86 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
Caver Fall
Trapped/Stranded
25 14 20  19 22 22 22 19 20 15 21 27 15 20 17 13 20 14 5 10 12 11 11
- 18 18 13 17 14 15 65743
Difficulty on Rope
Rock-fall
Lost
Flooding
Hypothermia
Illness
Exhaustion
Drowning
Stuck
Bad Air
Acetylene-related
Equipment
14 17202023212011 1144210032000442
Other
34868454663232332l02
Caving-related
Incidents
-21020115 2 11 2 9 4 19 9 8 4 6
Cave Diving Incidents
Result
Fatality
86 87 888990 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Consequence
Total Diving
Incidents
971058876972 2 17 8 94 5 74257

---------- Page 8 ----------
2007 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
26 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 6
Fountain Cave
Virginia
February 10
Greenhorn Cave
California
March 13
Turtle Graveyard Cave
Tennessee
March 22
Dunham Cave
Alabama
March 25
XTC Cave
New York
April 21
Simmons-Mingo Cave
West Virginia
April 28
Small Mouth Cave
Indiana
April 30
Deadman's Cave
Texas
May 15
Sinks of Gandy
West Virginia
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave-Wind
May 26
Cave
Wyoming
May 26
Sarlacc Cave
West Virginia
July 9
Camps Gulf Cave
Tennessee
July 14
Coon Cave
Indiana
July 26
Breathing Hole Cave
Indiana
August 3
Fitton Cave
Arkansas
August 11
Pryor Springs Cave
Tennessee
August 14
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
September 1
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
September 23
Rumbling Falls Cave
Tennessee
September 25
Anderson Spring Cave
Georgia
September 28
Jewel Cave
South Dakota
October 7
Rusty's Cave
Georgia
October 13
Airman's Cave
Texas
November
Organ Cave
West Virginia
November 6
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
December 27
Harrison Salt Peter Cave
Tennessee
2008 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
25 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 5
Rio Camuy Cave
Puerto Rico
January 22
Cueva El Gran Plano
Puebla, Mexico
March 9
Indian Rock Cave
Alabama
March 20
Rainbow Falls Cave
Tennessee
March 30
Malloy's Waterfall Cave
Georgia
April 9
unnamed cave
Tennessee
May 15
Crystal Cave
California
May 24
Brewers Pit
New Mexico
May 30
Lava River Cave
Oregon
June 30
Falls Cliff Cave
Vermont
July 14
Fulford Cave
Colorado
July 18
Devils's Den Cave
Missouri
July 18
unnamed cave
Iowa
July 18
unnamed cave
Iowa
July 21
Parachute Cave
Tennessee
July 24
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave-Wind
Wyoming
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rock-fall
caver fall, inadequate equipment,
injury and aid
equipment failure
stranded, inadequate equipment,
aid, no injury
equipment failure
injury, no aid
rock-fall
injury and aid
lost, hypothermia
injury and aid
caver fall
fatality
drowning
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded, ice plug
injury, no aid
rock-fall
aid, no injury
lost
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
trapped, tight passage
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall, equipment failure
aid, no injury
lost
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
lost
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rock-fall
aid, no injury
lost
Result
Incident Type
fatality
rock-fall
injury and aid
caver fall
no consequence
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
stranded, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
caver fall
no consequence
other, dynamite
aid, no injury
stranded inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall, stuck
injury and aid
caver fall, stuck
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded, ice plug

---------- Page 9 ----------
Cave
July 27
Bowden Cave
West Virginia
July 27
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
August 13
Wayne's Cave
Tennessee
unnamed ice cave near Snoqualmie
August 21
Pass
Washington
August 31
Ain't Barbwire Cave
Arizona
September 27
unnamed cave
Belize
October 18
Fort Stanton Cave
New Mexico
December 1
unnamed cave near Pembroke
Kentucky
December 8
Byers Cave
Alabama
2007 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
5 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
February 14
Allen Mill Pond Spring
Florida
February 19
Catfish Hole
Florida
March 5
Jackson Blue Spring
Florida
March 16
Madison Blue Spring
Florida
July 14
The Crack, Withlacoochee River
Florida
2008 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
7 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
February 1
Forty Fathom Grotto
Florida
March 11
Devil's Ear
Florida
June 9
Jackson Blue Spring
Florida
Quintanna Roo,
July
Sistema Najanon,
Mexico
September 19
Jackson Blue Spring
Florida
November 12
Wayne's World (School Sink)
Florida
November 15
Forty Fathom Grotto
Florida
2007 Reported Caving Related Incidents
4 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
Newfoundland,
February 5
flooded mine #2
Canada
February 8
Hognose Cave
Utah
May 11
Longhorn Quarry
Texas
British Columbia,
June 11
unnamed sea cave near Own Point
Canada
aid, no injury
lost
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
other, medical
injury and aid
rock-fall (ice cave collapse)
no consequence
caver fall
fatality
drowning
fatality
illness
fatality
rock-fall (dig collapse)
aid, no injury
lost
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning, mapping solo, out of air
fatality
drowning, out of air
fatality
drowning, stuck, exceeded training
fatality
drowning, medical issue
fatality
drowning, medical issue
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning
fatality
drowning, equipment failure, operator
error
fatality
drowning, illness
no consequence
other, equipment issues
fatality
drowning, equipment failure


********** 2 fatalities
drowning, multiple issues
fatality
drowning
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning, medical issue
aid, no injury
stranded, not actually a cave
aid, no injury
lost, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
trapped / stranded

---------- Page 10 ----------
2008 Reported Caving Related Incidents
6 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 28
unnamed cave near Chuckey
Tennessee
Vera Cruz,
March 28
unnamed cave
Mexico
March 31
No Name Tunnel
Colorado
April 7
unnamed cave near El Paso
Texas
August 2
Wayne's World (School Sink)
Florida
November 12
unnamed cave near Carlsbad
New Mexico
Acknowledgments
As always, we are all indebted to the people who have contributed reports for this issue. Their willingness to share their experiences
makes ACA a valuable resource for all cavers. Several notable correspondents have contributed a substantial portion of the material for
these reports. They include: George Dasher, Jeff Bozanic, Mark Minton, Bill Putnam, and Pat Seiser. Many valuable comments, proof
reading, corrections, and suggestions were provided by reviewers Bonny Armstrong, George Dasher, John LaMar Cole, and Forrest
Wilson.
Many dive related comments were provided by Forrest Wilson.
Acronyms and Explanations
2-meter SAR radio
Search-And-Rescue radios in the 155 megahertz to 170 megahertz range
104s
104 cubic foot capacity Scuba tanks
ACL and MCL
Ligaments in the knee
ATM
atmosphere
CF
cubic feet
cookie
A cookie is a non-directional marker, used to confirm that the diver actually came from that route. It is like
leaving breadcrumbs.
CPR
Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation
EAN
Enriched Air Nitrox. It is air with oxygen added. It reduces decompression, but in excess can cause oxygen
toxicity.
FD
Fire Department
FSW
feet salt water. Depth in feet for salt water
IC
Incident Command
KED
spine-immobilization device wrapped around the patient's torso and back of head
MA
Mechanical Advantage. Used in technical rope-hauling systems
MRA
Mountain Rescue Association
MSW
meters salt water. Depth in meters for salt water
PSI
Pounds per Square Inch
Puka
Ceiling collapse in a lava tube forming an entrance
SAR
Search and Rescue
SKED
Plastic rescue stretcher wrapped around the patient used to transport over rough terrain
Stokes Litter
Aluminum or hard-plastic rescue stretcher used to transport patients over rough terrain
Tees
In cave diving, when a passage bifurcates
Z-rig
A rescue haul technique that allows rescuers to raise a patient
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
dog trapped
fatality
fall
fatality
illness
injury and aid
car accident
fatality
drowning, swimming
injury and aid
vehicle fell into cave

---------- Page 11 ----------
Previously Unreported Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 24 June 2006
Trout Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, injury, aid
On June 24th, 2006, 12 scouts (aged 8 to 12 years old) and two
trip leaders were visiting Trout Cave. They were all wearing
helmets with headlamps. In the maze-like area off of the
Register Room, one of the boys fell while climbing down
through either the breakdown or at a small drop off, and gashed
his chin open on a rock. Mike Hutchinson was nearby in the
cave and went to help when he heard crying. The scout leaders
bandaged the boy's face as best as possible, but could not
remember the correct route to the entrance. Mike's group
escorted them back to the entrance and down the bluff with little
trouble.
Mike Hutchenson, Incident Report, 13 May 2007
Comments: The boy was taken to the hospital in Harrisonburg,
VA for stitches.


********** 9 September 2006
Endless Cave, New Mexico
stranded, aid, no injury
Brian Alger and William Tucker started into the cave at 10 AM
on their last trip to complete the survey of the Eastern Maze.
Tammy Tucker remained on the surface to watch the weather,
even though there were no clouds in the sky. The route into the
Eastern Maze is small, and is followed by the even smaller P-
Trap, a low, tight belly crawl. The survey went smoothly, and
required a "clean gear" change of clothes to protect the cave.
About 4 PM, Tammy noticed large clouds in the distance, which
moved closer and some large drops fell. High winds and heavy
rain followed. Like most desert storms, it was over in a half an
hour, so Tammy headed to the Endless Entrance. She found a
strong flow of water heading into the cave and after wading in a
short distance, she discovered all of the water was flowing down
into the P-Trap. It was now sumped.
Brian and William surveyed in dry, up-trending passages most
of the day. After a brief meal at 6 PM, they went to survey the
last passage where it was dripping heavily from everywhere.
They returned to the where they had changed into clean suits and
found that the room was now under several inches of water.
When they returned to the P-Trap, they found it sumped. The
line near the edge of the water showed the water was down
about an inch from its high point, so they moved to a dry area
and started to wait at 8 PM.
On the surface, Tammy called and left messages with a regular
member of the survey trips, then called Lubbock Area Grotto
members. At 9 PM, she called Jim Goodbar, of the BLM. who
told her it would only be a matter of time before the cavers
returned. Jim Goodbar and Ray Nance drove out to the cave.
The water continued to go down at a rate of one to two inches
per hour. Voice contact was made at midnight. Brian has a
smaller frame, SO at 3 AM, with about three inches of airspace,
he was pulled through. However, when William made the
attempt he had more difficulty. When the entrance-side caver
went into the water, the water level went up and both cavers
retreated. Webbing was tossed through the constriction, and
William was pulled through with one eye and part of his mouth
under water.


********** Tammy Tucker, Lubbock Area Grotto Trip Report: 20060908,
"Endless Cave Topside at Endless Maze. 9 September 2006
Brian K. Alger, Lubbock Area Grotto Trip Report: 20060909,
"Endless Cave - Eastern Maze Part 4. 9 September 2006


********** William Tucker, Lubbock Area Grotto Trip Report: 20060910,
"Last Trip to Endless Eastern Maze. 9 September 2006
Comments: Waiting for the sump to go down was the correct
method to get out. The cavers had grown chilled while waiting
for several hours and were completely wet. While
uncomfortable and anxious to get out, letting the water level
drop even further would have allowed a safer retreat.


********** 10 September 2006
Naj Tunich Cave, Guatemala
caver fall, injury, aid
A research team had received an archeology permit to the
vertical Naj Tunich. Included were Alan Cobb, Hazel Barton,
Brandon Kowalis, Dawn and Benjamin von Cramon, Paul
Burger, and seven production personnel from the Lone Wolf
Documentary Group. About 420 feet down a 600-foot deep pit
series with rope drops of 70, 270, 15, 20 and 15 feet, Alan
dislocated his shoulder while going down a steep crawlway
headfirst. The shoulder immediately popped back in and Alan
made it back up to the bottom of the lower 15-foot drop on his
own. The cavers slung the arm as a precaution, and Alan
informed those present that he had chronic problem with
dislocations. Hazel re-rigged the lower 15 and 20-foot pitches to
make the ascent easier for Alan and the injured caver
successfully climbed these. The team then rigged a traverse line
and helped him negotiate an awkward traverse into a chamber
below the upper 15-foot rope. Given the straight forward level
of difficulty in ascending out of the cave (all of the climbs were
already rigged) and that Alan was moving fine, two cavers left to
push the bottom of the cave and look for Mayan artifacts (the
reason for the permit).
For some reason, at the upper 15-foot pitch, Alan decided to
climb a shorter, 10-foot crevice, even though he had his vertical
gear on. During this climb Alan twisted and dislocated his knee.
Hazel free climbed above him, did a change over for him, and
lowered Alan back down the rope. Alan's knee was relocated
but the caver went into shock.
Alan was made more comfortable and they waited together for
two hours for the push team to return. The team was able to get
the caver to the top of the next 15-foot pitch and to the bottom of

---------- Page 12 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
the 270-foot pitch. Hazel and Brandon climbed the last two
pitches and exited the cave (a one-mile traverse) to call for help.
The people at the local hotel did not pick up, but a call to cavers
in the U.S. at 2 AM was successful. The cavers in the U.S. were
able to reach the hotel management, who alerted the rest of the
team. Brandon and John Climaco (a mountaineer with training
in crevasse rescue) returned to the cave with food and a
thermarest and John went down to Alan who was able to sleep
comfortably.
Due to the dangerous nature of the road to the cave (banditos),
the Guatemalan Special Forces were called to lead the convoy
and deal with any gunfights.
The team did not have enough equipment for a counterbalance
and the pit configuration limited the options. However, John
Climaco's knowledge of mountaineering rescue techniques,
along with the help of Brandon and Benjamin, allowed them to
rig a a safe haul system in a timely manner. The camera crew
was critically important in providing muscle and hauling food,
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 6 January
Fountain Cave, Virginia
caver fall, injury, no aid
During a DC Grotto photo-training trip, Ed Devine (50) slipped
and fell, suffering minor internal bruising on his ribs. The
former commercial cave trail is constructed of stone steps and
trails of packed earth. Several hours into the trip, Ed was
standing just off of the trail conversing with two other cavers,
with his arms loaded with equipment when he casually stepped
to the side and into a six-foot deep hole. Ed had been
experimenting with new photo and video gear and was carrying
several packs and two camcorders in his hands when he fell. He
reflexively protected the gear, and fell 4 four feet, landing hard
against a ledge on his upper ribs below the armpit. After
assessment that there was no serious injury, the team continued
the trip, but he experienced pain when coughing or laughing.
Ed Devine, Incident Report, 21 January 2007
Comments: Ed attributes this incident to inattentiveness and
complacency while strolling though an easy cave. Additionally,
he was distracted by photographic issues and the social aspects
of a large, festive crowd. Easy caves can be dangerous too.


********** 10 February
Greenhorn Cave, California
rock-fall, injury, no aid
Michelle Nilles, Randi Poer, Matt Covington, Will Heltsley,
Elaine Garvey, Kevin Branscum, Genevieve Mattar, and Celeste
Yang entered Greenhorn, a granite talus cave for a grotto trip.
Kevin and Genevieve left the cave early, and the rest continued
to the upper end of the lower section of the cave. In a canyon
perhaps 10 feet wide, with large chock stones 20 feet above, the
water, and other supplies. They put down their equipment to
help which during a down time, the cavers used to film bits.
Alan was out at 1 PM after being underground for 21 hours.
Benjamin von Cramon, Incident Report, 15 October 2006
Hazel Barton (via Bill Putnam), Incident Report, 26 June 2007
Hazel Barton, CaveChat, 13 June 2007
Comments: This is an excellent effort in a rough situation,
especially with the thinking outside the box to ask for surface
support. Even though a comment is needed about splitting up
the team after the initial injury, the team did not know of Alan's
chronic dislocation problems before the incident. Had they
known beforehand about the preexisting issues, they would have
not allowed Alan down the pit series in such a remote area.
Any injured caver, no matter how good his spirits, has a
potential for further injury, and this is a classic example.
group set up a photograph with Will as a model and Celeste
operating a flash behind him.
Celeste crawled up a ~2000 pound boulder that was next to the
rock on which the flash was perched. The boulder was 4 by 1 by
2.5 feet in size. Once her full weight was transferred to the
boulder, it dislodged with her hanging onto the side. As the
boulder fell, it pushed Celeste slightly backwards into free-fall.
Celeste and the boulder fell from about 5 feet above where the
chock stones formed the upper level of the canyon. Below was a
break in the chock stones that formed a triangular hole about 4
feet across. Celeste and the boulder fell toward this hole, and
Celeste was pushed backwards into one of the corners.
The boulder bounced onto the front of Celeste's hips, driving her
tailbone into the rocks forming the sides of the hole, before her
pelvis settled neatly into the corner. The boulder was stopped
from crushing her pelvis by the acute angle of the sides of the
hole. From where Will was standing, it was not clear that
Celeste hadn't been chopped in half. He quickly climbed 15 feet
to the top of one of the boulders where she was lodged.
The boulder was wedged in the hole in front of Celeste, who was
still 20 feet above the canyon floor. Her first thought was that
she could feel her legs and they were not in tremendous pain.
Her next thought was to get as far away from this thing as
possible, SO she braced herself on the rocks that formed the sides
of the hole and began wriggling up to get on top of the chock
stones. A second later, the boulder dislodged and fell the rest of
the way to the floor, where it shattered into several pieces, some
of which traveled a long way from the point of impact.
Celeste stemmed across the hole for three or four minutes, until
she could trust her legs not to shake, then moved to a flat chock
stone to rest a little longer and get some food and water. Her
tailbone was badly bruised, but she could walk and crawl her
way out of the cave.

---------- Page 13 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Celeste Yang, Will Heltsley, Incident Report, undated
Comments: Celeste was incredibly lucky. If the hole hadn't been
exactly the right shape, if the sides of the hole had not been
sloped enough for her to hold onto, if someone had been below
her when the boulder fell, or even close enough to be hit by a
shard, it could have been a very different story. The accident
could only have been prevented by Celeste recognizing that the
boulder had the potential to be unstable, but neither Will, Matt,
nor Celeste recalled it looking unsafe.


********** 13 March
Turtle Graveyard Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, inadequate equipment, injury, aid
At 10:15 PM, Christopher Pique (27) and three friends,
including his brother, began their caving trip into Turtle
Graveyard Cave. They had two flashlights and two chemical
lights. Christopher was the second person down and was hand-
over-handing down an old rope with no helmet, no vertical gear,
and no belay, when their one-inch-diameter, laid, dry-rotted rope
broke. He fell between 30 and 50 feet, striking a ledge. He then
fell another 30 feet, striking the back of his head, and drifted in
an out of consciousness.
Christopher's friends went for help, and the Paulette Volunteer
FD, Maynardville FD, and Knoxville Volunteer Rescue Squad
responded. A vertical raise was implemented and Christopher
was flown to the hospital at 1:30 AM. The other spelunker was
assisted out of the cave by the rescue teams.
Danny Britton, Tag-Net, "Union County Cave Rescue." 17
March 2007
Charles, CaveChat, 5 June 2007
unattrituted, VolunteerTV.com, "Man Rescued After Cave Fall."


********** 14 March 2007
News Sentinel staff, Knoxville News Sentinel, "Caver rescued,
hospitalized after fall." 14 March 2007
Comments: Reports differ on how many were on the trip. At
least one other person was in the cave when the rope broke and
there was someone still on the surface to go for help. Charles
(on the rescue team) was told "they used the rope to pull cars,
they use it for everything". Please, treat your ropes with respect.
Your life hangs on the rope's integrity.


********** 22 March
Dunham Cave, Alabama
stranded, inadequate equipment, aid, no injury
At 12:30 PM, Justin Lovett entered the cave, solo, with a single,
three-cell flashlight. He was wearing jeans and a t-shirt and had
no helmet or other equipment. After exploring for a couple of
hours his flashlight died. Justin sat down to wait.
Justin was visiting his grandmother, but his mother called
authorities when he did not return. Fortunately, Justin had
mentioned he planned to go to Dunham Cave. The Huntsville
Cave Rescue Unit, Marshall County Rescue, and
Chattanooga/Hamilton County Cave and Cliff Team responded.
Teams were sent in after finding a still cold coke can at the
entrance. Justin was found about 4000 feet in, cold, uninjured,
and sitting on a rock. After a brief medical check, he was able to
make the 45-minute exit trip to the entrance, arriving at 8:40
PM.
Bill Putnam, personal notes, undated
Ellis Eskew, WHNT-TV, Huntsville News, "Missing Hazel Green
Boy Found Alive in Cave" 22 March 2007
Sharon Faulkner, NSS News, March 2007
Comments: Among the other obvious mistakes made, Justin did
two things right: he told someone where he was going and when
his only light died, he sat down and waited. These two things
probably resulted in avoiding a much worse outcome.


********** 25 March
XTC Cave, New York
rock-fall, injury, no aid
Clint Matter, Mike Telladira, and Bob Dion were exploring the
recently discovered XTC Cave. The cave contains many loose
rocks, chock stones, and is also cold and wet. After exploring,
they started out with Bob in the lead. Bob was coming out of a
long pinch crawl with Mike starting into the crawl, and Clint
behind them near the top of the waterfall, when a large rock-fall
occurred near Clint. Bob heard the very loud rock-fall, and Mike
yelled to Bob something about Clint being "trapped". Bob
turned around and was yelling to Mike to find out what
happened, but the noise of the waterfall made communication
difficult. Mike continued crawling into the pinch when his pack
slipped down a crack. He was told to leave it and keep moving
back towards Bob on the entrance side of the collapse. As Mike
got to the end of the crawlway, Bob could see Clint's light
behind Mike (good), then Mike became stuck (bad). Mike
backed up and became stuck again. He was able to back up a
second time, calm down, turn over, hand Bob his light, and get
through the last squeeze. Clint was able to move enough rocks
at the far side of the crawlway to squeeze through to the entrance
side of the collapse. When Clint crawled up to the other two, he
said he was "fine", but the rock-fall had crushed his hand.
Clint was later taken to the hospital by Larry Boto, where he
needed surgery, stitches, and a cast.
Bob Dion email to Chuck Porter, forwarded to Bill Putnam, 13
June 2007
John Dunham, Northeastern Caver, "XTC Cave." June 2007
Comments: The cavers had problems communicating as the
waterfall was very loud. Also on the way out, but prior to
Clint's injury, Clint knocked a "good-sized" rock off, hitting
Mike in the face but causing no injury. Watch for and garden
loose rocks when there is the potential for rock-fall.


********** 21 April
Simmons-Mingo Cave, West Virginia
lost, hypothermia, injury, aid
On Saturday, five people including Dan Sampson (25), Skye
Fisher (20), Keri Krall (21), Jason Ross (30), and Heidi
McWilliams (20) decided to do a through trip from the
Zarathustra Entrance to the Historic Entrance of Simmons-
Mingo Cave. Dan and Skye had been in the cave the year
before, but had turned around before completing the through
trip. The party expected the trip to last about 10 hours and was

---------- Page 14 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
properly equipped with helmets, coveralls for some, packs, and
polypro. The trip was going reasonably well despite a fall by
Keri, where she injured her ribs and a knee while going through
a corkscrew passage. About 10 hours in, they reached a large
room where all of the passages looped back to the same place.
They made several short forays out of the room, but were
unsuccessful.
Authorities were called by a local landowner when it was
noticed that their vehicle was still parked outside. A three-
person hasty team of Lieutenant Kelly Bostian and two others
from the Shavers Fork Fire Rescue entered the cave at 11:15
PM. After a couple of hours the three of them turned around,
following protocol of reestablishing communications.
After about 32 hours, Skye and Jason decided to make a strong
push for the entrance, but got lost. They were able to return to
the other three after eight hours.
One hundred twenty volunteers from five states, along with the
Red Cross, Salvation Army and State Police arrived to help
search. After several failed attempts, the cavers were located at
11:30 AM on Monday. Food, water, and warm clothes were
given. It took four hours to get them to the entrance. They had
been underground 50 hours. Keri was flown to Ruby Memorial
Hospital, where she was kept over night. The other four were
treated at the scene and released.
Generaro C. Armas, Associated Press, "Five rescued after 2 days
in cave", 25 April 2007
Bill Putnam, personal notes
Ted Czech, The York Daily Record, "A real lost weekend." 25
April 2007
Comments: They were found about 1500 feet from the Historic
Entrance. About ten minutes after the lost cavers had a "we're
done for" conversation, they heard rescuers calling Skye's name.


********** 28 April
Small Mouth Cave, Indiana
caver fall, injury, aid
Garrett Jones (21), Bruce McDougal (27), and James McDougal
(21) went spelunking in a southern Indiana cave. Around
midnight and about one-quarter mile in, Garrett fell 15 feet from
a ledge, reportedly while trying to rappel down a pit, where he
injured his ankle.
Emergency personnel were called about 4 AM and several dozen
law enforcement and firefighters responded. After reaching
Garrett they warmed him and began the journey out.
Communications with the surface was through five runners
passing messages between the entrance to the patient.
The three spelunkers did not have the landowner's permission
and, upon reaching the surface, all three were arrested for
criminal trespass, vandalism (spray paint), and removing
formations from the cave.
Melissa Gagliardi, Courier Journal, "3 charged after Indiana
cave rescue." 29 April 2007
unattributed, South Bend Tribune, "Conservation officers rescue
injured man from cave in southern Indiana." 29 April 2007
unattributed, WAVE 3 TV Louisville, "Officers rescue injured
man, two friends from cave; all three arrested." 30 April 2007
Comments: Garrett refused further medical treatment. All three
were held in the Harrison County Jail.


********** 30 April
Deadman's Cave, Texas
fatality, drowning, bad air
At 2 PM, Thomas Summers III (44), the manager and partner of
Cave Without a Name (a tourist cave) and Brent Holbrook, were
on a troubleshooting mission in Deadman's Cave, a flooded cave
on Summers' property. Deadman's Cave is the resurgence of
Cave Without a Name.
Recent rains had raised the water table, blocking access to the
outer reaches of the cave. This is an area where advanced cavers
like to explore and Thomas and Brent were attempting to
remove any blockage that might be reducing the outflow.
About 300 feet into the cave, with Thomas swimming in the
lead, the passage ceiling lowered to just a few inches of airspace.
They were not wearing helmets. Brent decided to go no further.
He then heard "a sputtering sound" and received no response to
his shouts. He went for help.
More than 90 searchers arrived to help. Rescue crews used
pumps to lower the water level. About 9 PM, cave divers Jean
Krejca and Linda Palit were able to retrieve Thomas' body
without the need for breathing apparatus.
Jean Krijca, Incident Report, undated,
Zeke MacCormack, San Antonio Express-News, "Kendall
County cave drowning victim was tourist site's manager." 2
May 2007
Zeke MacCormack, San Antonio Express-News, "'Cave Without
a Name' closed after fatal accident." 1 May 2007
Vincent T. Davis, San Antonio Express-News, "Tourist cave
worker found dead after failing to return from inside." 1 May
Geary Schindel, personal communication, 23 July 2009
Comments: Thomas was swimming in low airspace. The
coroner's report showed he had died from drowning. Jean
Krejca, after talking with Brent, considers bad air may be a
complicating factor in the low air-space passage. This possibly
caused disorientation. Thomas' labored breathing was followed
by sputtering, but was not followed by splashing or a struggle.
Others believe that Thomas pushed the low airspace passage and
did not stop when there was no air space.


********** 15 May
Sinks of Gandy, West Virginia
caver fall, injury, no aid
Marilyn (about 53) was touring the cave with the West Virginia
Geological and Economic Survey (WVGES) and science
students from John Marshall High School. There were six
adults, plus several WVGES trip leaders in the 29 person group,
who were traveling from the Upstream Entrance to the
Downstream Entrance. About halfway through the cave,
Marilyn slipped on a sand bar and fell on her leg. She had a
helmet-mounted light, but was wearing tennis shoes. The area

---------- Page 15 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
where she fell was not difficult. After sitting for awhile to
regain her composure, she discovered there was no way she
could put any weight on her foot.
The rest of the class continued the tour through the cave. Ken
Ashton left to call for help, while Pat John and three adults
carried Marilyn out the Upstream Entrance. They then carried
her to the top of the hill where an ambulance took her to the
hospital. The ankle was broken seriously broken, and required
two surgeries, including a plate with eight screws. Recovery
took all summer.
Pat Johns, Incident Report, 20 December 2007
Comments: Tennis shoes do not provide traction comparable to
good boots.


********** 26 May
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave-Wind Cave, Wyoming
stranded, aid, no injury
Joseph Keyes (21), a professional cave guide, was leading a
group of five; (Branden Itotani (23), Caitlin Sitton (19), Trisha
Itotani (25), Taylor Sorenson (23) and Taylor's friend (23)) in a
through trip from Ice Cave to Wind Cave. The trip involves a
40-foot ice rappel into a big room and normally takes 4 to 8
hours to complete. After the rappel, they continued the trip until
almost reaching the other entrance. There, they were blocked by
an ice-plug blocking the entire passage. They chipped away at
the ice with a knife for 22 hours, but were unable to determine if
their efforts would be successful. They "were in quite a fix"
and decided to spend the night in the cave.
The next morning, two cavers were doing the through trip in the
opposite direction and arrived at the opposite side of the ice
plug. These two cavers were equipped with ice axes and the two
teams were able to chip away from both sides and allow the
trapped team to escape.
Meanwhile, Teton County SAR had been called for the overdue
party. As the SAR members were gathering, two of the six
stranded cavers arrived at the trail head to apologize and say all
were OK.
RondoSteve, TetonAT.com, "Six Spend Night in Wind/Ice
Cave." 28 May 2007
Joe Keyes, TetonAT.com blog entry, 8 Nov 2007
Joseph Keyes, Incident Report, "2007 darby (sic) ice cave
incident." 12 June 2009
Comments: The group had a report-in time and missed it. Joe
had not heard of the ice plug prior to the trip.


********** 26 May
Sarlacc Cave, West Virginia
rock-fall, injury, no aid
Harry Fair, George Dasher, Lucas Bowman (22), Sara Hicks,
and Pat Bingham were ridgewalking when they found a good-
looking sink with a tight entrance and a large, vertical fin of a
rock stuck in the entrance. George, Harry, and Lucas all jumped
(in turn) on the fin and it did not move. George tried to squeeze
into the entrance, but it was too small (or he was too big) and
Lucas had to pull him from the entrance. Lucas was then able to
squeeze into the cave, followed by Harry. Sarah passed their
helmets to them and they explored the small cave, which went a
short way and became too tight.
Harry exited the cave first and in doing so, he kicked a large,
waterlogged log that was evidently holding up the vertical rock.
The rock fell on Lucas, hitting his helmet and ankle, and badly
scratching his arm. Shouts from Pat on the surface initially
brought no response, but finally Harry called up that they were
OK. They were able to crawl to the surface where they
determined that the cuts were not deep enough to go to the
hospital. They named the cave after the sand monster in Return
of the Jedi that tiries to eat Luke Skywalker.
George Dasher, email to Bill Putnam, "ACA", 24 June 2007
Comments: Virgin entrance gardening from the inside should be
done with great caution. To the group's credit they all checked
the dangerous looking fin of rock and determined it was stable
prior to entering. They were also very lucky they passed Harry
and Lucas' helmets in. The action may have saved Lucas' life.


********** 9 July
Camps Gulf Cave, Tennessee
lost, aid, no injury
Two cavers went on a trip to Camps Gulf Cave and became lost.
They had proper lights and equipment. Van Buren County
rescuers located them and escorted them out of the cave. They
had been in the second room for about seven hours.
Bill Putnam, Incident Report, 11 July, 2007
Comments: There is currently little other information available
about this incident. Did the team have a surface watch and an
expected time out? Caver input would have helped make this
incident clearer.


********** 14 July
Coon Cave, Indiana
caver fall, injury, aid
At 1:30 PM, Laurie Jarrett (31), Tom Jarrett, and Laurie's two
stepsons went to Coon Cave. Laurie rappelled the 40-foot deep
pit second, slipped on some moss, and was suddenly suspended
with the rope around her left bicep. She passed out and fell,
cutting the left side of her head on a rock. Tom sent his two
sons for help and rappelled down to be with Laurie. She was
passing in and out of consciousness.
The Van Buren Fire Department, Monroe County Emergency
Management, and an "independent cave rescue group" assisted.
Two from the Van Buren Fire Department rappelled in, placed
Laura on a backboard with Tom's help, and then in a litter for
the haul. She reached the surface at 5:32 PM.
Sarah Goddard, Reporter-Times "up from a hard fall." 18 July
2007.
Marcela Creps, Reporter-Times, "Martinsville woman rescued
from cave." 15 July 2007
Comments: It is not known if she was wearing a helmet. It is
also not known if she became detached from the rope. After
receiving seven stitches, Laurie was released but later checked

---------- Page 16 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
into the hospital because she was experiencing pains on her left
side.


********** 26 July
Breathing Hole Cave, Indiana
trapped, aid, no injury
Adam Craig (32), Craig Deiner (45), Dave Everton (46), and Jay
Kress (42) entered Breathing Hole Cave at 11:45 AM. The
group passed through the series of tight passages and
climbdowns, with the last one being the tightest. After touring
and photographing the cave they started their exit. Dave
climbed up first but Adam was unable to follow. After several
attempts with help, Adam retreated to the small room below.
Dave and Jay went to the surface to get hammers, and to call Ty
Spatta in the event his micro-shaving equipment would be
needed. Jay returned with food, water, and warm clothing but
had to make a 20-minute drive to get the hammers. Rocks were
chipped away, but Adam was still unable to negotiate the
squeeze. Ty arrived with the micro-shaving. The micro-shaving
effort was successful and Adam was able reach the surface at 9
PM and return to the 2007 Convention Campground (missing the
big rainstorm).
Adam Craig, Incident Report, 8 August 2007
Comments: There is a saying that "You can always get out of
what you got into," except for one constant axiom, gravity
works. The team did exactly what was needed to achieve a safe
exit and Ty Spatta had constructed the necessary rescue
equipment to remove the obstacle. Ty also added a nice touch,
he brought pizza.


********** 3 August
Fitton Cave, Arkansas
caver fall, injury, aid
Bill Frantz (63) was a member of an eight-person group (ages 22
to 63) that were issued a permit to explore. They entered just
before noon from the Beauty Entrance, traversed the Crystal
Passage to the Roundhouse Room, and returned to the T-Room.
Seven and a half hours into the trip they were negotiating the
"21 Jumps" section, where multiple levels of sinuous channels
intersect each other. Traveling through the area at a level above
the stream requires frequent stepping and jumping across the
stream. The route can also be completed by climbing down and
up some of the wider areas. For an undetermined reason, Bill did
not complete one jump and, as he fell, he rotated back with his
head and shoulder hitting the back wall 6 feet below. Bill fell
about 12 feet, was momentarily confused and thrashing. Will
Heltsley reached Bill first and immediately immobilized his
head to prevent further spinal injury.
With the help of others, Bill was relieved of his cave pack,
camera gear, and helmet. Then a careful log roll was performed
SO that Bill was on his back and off his painful shoulder.
Insulating clothing, cave packs, and a space blanket were applied
to provide warmth. Because of the possibility of spinal injury,
he was left flat until a neurological screening, spinal injury
assessment, and injury and orientation checks were completed.
All were negative and Bill was allowed to sit up. He suffered a
dislocated collar bone, bruised ribs, and a tender spot on the
back of his head. A tightly fitting fleece was used to immobilize
and secure Bill's arm to his chest while the vitals-log was
started. The decision was made to go out the easier, though
colder, Wet Entrance, which was located about 1500 feet from
the accident site. Team members were sent out of the cave to
begin a callout. John Tinsley and Jonah Schachner stayed with
Bill. Matt Covington and Will Heltsley, escorted three other
lightly clad team members out, then ate, gathered equipment,
and went back in.
The Park's SAR team was mobilized by Chuck Bidding, the
Park's Cave Specialist, and consisted of park staff and EMS
personnel, local first responders, and the Middle Ozark Lower
Earth Society (MOLES).
The self rescue began when Matt and Will returned. The route is
upstream and includes waist-to-chest-deep pools, four short
climbs, a crawlway, and an entrance climb. Bill was assisted
while negotiating the pools by having his seat harness held. The
climbs were rigged for safety and Bill was aided. Part of the self-
rescue team were ferrying gear to the entrance when they met
the first callout team. Bill reached the entrance at 5 AM and was
able to complete the hike to camp under his own power.
unattibuted, National Park Service Morning Report, "Injured
Caver Rescued From Fitton Cave." 14 August 2007
Bill Frantz, Incident Report, 4 December 2007
Comments: Bill is an NCRC instructor and others on the team
have NCRC training. Contributing factors to the fall may have
been fatigue, the natural tendency to follow others, a low ceiling,
and mud on the jump-off point. Also calling the section "21
Jumps" may have encouraged the party members to jump the
crossings while knowing that jumping in-cave is typically
discouraged.


********** 11 August
Pryor Springs Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, aid
Rick Gattone (43) and Chad Dubisson (30) went to Pryor Spring
Cave to do a pull-down trip from the Upper Entrance to the
Spring Entrance. The route requires three rappels, descending
pits of 31, 43 and 56 feet before connecting to the horizontal
passage leading to the spring.
The first pit is a 31-foot drop located just inside the upper
entrance. The pit is equipped with a permanent rappel anchor
consisting of two bolts connected by chains to an aluminum
rappel ring. Rick and Chad threaded their 9mm rope through the
ring and tied a barrel knot in the end, then they attached a light-
weight cord SO they could pull down the rope after descending.
In this manner, they planned to descend each pit. Chad had done
the trip several times before using 11mm rope and the "knot
block" method without incident, but this was Rick's first trip
using the method.
Rick went first. When he was about 10 feet down, the knot
suddenly pulled through the rappel ring and Rick fell to the
bottom of the pit. He suffered a fractured ankle, severely
fractured pelvis, and several fractured vertebrae.

---------- Page 17 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
The Chattanooga Hamilton County rescue was called. They
found Rick conscious, but in severe pain lying in the stream at
the bottom of the pit. His blood pressure was dangerously low
and continued to fall as he bled internally. Medic Andy Voss
started an IV and worked to stabilize Rick while rescuers rigged
the pit and packaged Rick for evacuation. Rick was hauled from
the pit and up the steep slope to the waiting ambulance, and to a
nearby helicopter landing zone where he was flown to Erlanger
Hospital in Chattanooga. The whole rescue took less than two
hours and even so, Rick's systolic blood pressure was down to
60.
Bill Putnam, Incident Report, 11 August 2007
Karen Zatkulak, www.newschannel9.com, "Man Rescued from
Cave - See the video," 15 August 2007
Comments: Always have a second person check the rigging.
One way to avoid a pull-through when using the "knot block"
method is to tie a carabineer into the knot. Had the accident
occurred at the second pit, Rick would have been stranded and
Chad would have been unable to get down the pit or out of the
cave. A rescue would not have been initiated until the cavers
were reported overdue that evening. Captain Buddy Lane said
this is the worst cave rescue we've had where the person has
survived."


********** 14 August
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
lost, aid, no injury
Three women cavers entered Sharps cave at noon, expecting to
be out by 3:30 PM to meet back up with their group. When they
did not return by 10 PM, those on the surface called the
emergency services. Shaver's Fork Fire Rescue responded and
entered the cave at 11:38 PM with extraction and aid equipment.
They located the lost cavers and returned to the surface at 1:00
AM.
unattributed, newsobserver.com, "Lost - and found" 16 August
Comments: It is not known where the cavers were located in the
cave. This incident had a good outcome due to the surface
watch acting properly.


********** 1 September
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, injury, aid
A 54-year-old male caver fell about 300 yards from the entrance
and broke his hip. EMS and the OTR site were called at 6:15
PM. Fire department personnel and 13 cavers responded. The
patient was out of the cave at 9:30 PM.
Scott Davis, CaveChat, "Sharps Fall?" 4 September 2007
Comments: Not much information has been distributed on this
rescue.


********** 23 September
Rumbling Falls Cave, Tennessee
difficulty on rope, aid, no injury
Ralph Powers, John M., Brian, and Cassie Conners, and "Cave
Rat" went on an enjoyable trip to the Rumble Room. After
viewing the Rumble Room they started their trip out, completing
the Rumble Room's 201-foot ascent and the Waterfall pitch. As
they approached the bottom of the entrance pit, they noted the
first of a group of four spelunkers (one named Alan) was
descending with no helmets and using the cavers' rope. The
four spelunkers had brought their own rope, but it was short.
After a discussion, Alan attached his ascending system (non
standard) to the cavers' rope and started back up. It was poorly
adjusted for him; too long in some places and too short in others.
After 20 feet, he realized that he would become tired before
reaching the top. Alan was able to make a change over and
rappelled back down. Ralph was carrying additional gear and
was able to create a frog system for Alan. Three of the caving
team climbed to the surface, then Alan, followed by John and
Ralph.
Ralph Powers, CaveChat, "Trip Report: Rumbling Rescue." 25
September 2007
Comments: Additionally, for his ascent, Alan had wrapped the
bottom of the caver's rope around a 75-pound stalactite to
provide tension his ascent. This would cause abrasion to the
rope


********** 25 September
Anderson Spring Cave, Georgia
caver fall, injury, aid
Three people, including the patient (26), were 1500 feet inside
Anderson Spring Cave where the man was climbing. He was
using a rock as a climbing aid when the rock came loose and
fell, breaking his leg. The cave is on private land SO one of the
individuals with the patient, went to the property owner's house
to call for help. The Walker County Fire and Rescue responded
at 4:15 PM, packaged the patient, and had him en route to the
hospital in just over two hours.
Larry Brooks, Walker County Messenger, "Rescue personnel
extricate injured man after caving accident", 26 September 2007
Comments: No names were available. Check your handholds
and footholds before using them.


********** 28 September
Jewel Cave, South Dakota
caver fall, injury, no aid
Rene Ohms and Ole Heyer entered Jewel Cave at 1:45 PM to
download airflow data from an anemometer located near
Hurricane Corner approximately 10 minutes from the entrance.
At 2:15 PM, on the way out of the cave, Rene slipped as she was
stepping down, causing her to miss the rock intended for her
right foot. She fell about two feet and landed on her left knee,
breaking the kneecap,. Rene was able to exit the cave under her
own power by favoring the leg. X-rays confirmed the break.

---------- Page 18 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Rene Ohms, Incident Report, 12 December 2007
Comments: The manganese-coated trail was slippery from heavy
use. Rene was wearing knee pads, which probably prevented the
injury from being worse. Had this incident been deeper in the
cave, it could have been much more serious and required
assistance.
October
Rusty's Cave, Georgia
stranded, inadequate equipment, aid, no injury
Alan Leedy and "Tallgirl" went to Rusty's Cave to take some
photos. As they were leaving, a lone man arrived with an OSHA
type safety harness, a figure 8, and using a utility rope from
Lowe's to lower himself down the pit. He had no ascending
gear or helmet. After determining the man was unable to get out
on his own, Alan attached the man to his half-round and frogged
out of the 30-foot entrance pit with the man hanging below. The
pit had been rigged such that, even with the person hanging from
his harness, the lip was manageable and the extraction was
successful.
Alan Leedy, CaveChat, "rescue at rusty's (sic)", 10 October
Comments: While successful, concern was expressed about
being able to complete a change over while having so much
weight hanging below. This requires both strength and current
proficiency with one's vertical system. The rescued man said he
was part of the NSS but displayed none of the safe caving
practices used by NSS cavers.


********** 13 October
Airman's Cave, Texas
lost, aid, no injury
Two women and one man from the University of Texas decided
to explore to the back of the cave at 11 AM. They established a
return time of midnight. Airman's Cave is 12,000 feet long with
many long crawlways and some belly crawls that are quite tight.
There is a mazy area in the middle, and a round trip of
experienced cavers takes about 12 hours. At 5:30 AM, a friend
notified authorities that the group had not returned.
Rescue teams and local cavers responded. Both a hasty team
and a push team to the back of the cave returned without finding
the group. They did find a cell phone and several bottles of
water. Personnel began to stage water, food, and medical
equipment at key points and laid a phone line. A caver with
extensive knowledge of the cave knew of probable locations
where the group could be lost, entered with one other rescuer
and began a thorough search. This team located the lost party.
Before 5 PM the three were located in the "Poetry Passage" area
of the maze in the middle of the cave. They were off of the main
route and 2 1/2 to 3 hours from the entrance. They were uninjured
and, after receiving water and food, they were escorted out of the
cave. They had been underground for more than 30 hours.
DJ Walker, Incident Report, 14 October 2007
unattributed, The Blotter, "Rescuers find missing students at
Airman's Cave." 14 October 2007
Cavechat.org, "Cave rescue under way at Airman's Cave,
Texas." 14-15 October 2007
unattributed, CNN.com, "Texas explorers emerge from Airman's
Cave.", 14 October 2007
Comments: Exhaustion and getting off trail in the maze
contributed to the group's inability to complete the trip. The
group made a good decision to establish a surface watch. If the
surface watch had not waited 5 1/2 hours to notify authorities, the
explorers would have faired much better. Be sure your surface
watch understands the full extent of their responsibilities.
November
Organ Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, injury, aid
While on a paid, wild caving trip, a man (whose name is not
known) in his early fifties stepped straight down and ripped the
muscles from his left kneecap. The group in the upper level of
the cave near the Sand Room, over 2400 feet from the
commercial tour. There was no twisting of the knee when the
incident occurred.
A team member was sent to the commercial entrance for help.
The cave owner (Janie Morgan), another cave guide, and two
volunteer customers responded with additional aid equipment,
including a backboard and the bottom parts of crutches. After
warming the patient in a tent, his legs were splinted with the
crutches and duct tape and he was placed on the backboard and
the extraction began. Five people completed the haul to the
commercial tour, where local firemen finished the rescue.
The injury required immediate surgery.
Janie Morgan (via George Dasher), Incident Report, 3 December
Comments: The trip leader had a first-aid kit that was used. The
accident could have happened anywhere but occurred in a cave.


********** 6 November
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
rock-fall, injury, no aid
Michel Renda (from France), John Lyles, and Daniel Chailloux
(from France) were on a 12 member exploration trip to the
Western Borehole led by John Lyles and Peter Bosted. On the
fourth day of a seven-day trip they started surveying some
"previously enjoyed" passage. Two stations into the survey, a
block next to the station weighing 60 to 70 pounds fell, pinning
Michel's head to the floor. He sustained a broken molar and a
bump on the head. Michel was able to continue the survey and
later that day, the team discovered Emerald City with over 1000
feet of well decorated borehole.
John Lyles and Peter Bosted, "Lechuguilla Cave Expedition
Report November 2 - November 8, 2007." undated
Comments: Had Michel not been wearing a helmet, the outcome
of this incident could have been substantially different. Be
careful of those rocks, especially in passages that are not heavily
traveled.

---------- Page 19 ----------
2007 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 27 December
Harrison Salt Peter Cave, Tennessee
lost, aid, no injury
Tonya Davis (19) and Jeremy Leverette (20), left their child with
a baby sitter and joined Brad Pierce (28) to go spelunking. They
were poorly equipped and had not planned for the excursion.
They were carrying only three small flashlights and had no
helmets.
When the couple did not return, the babysitter called some
friends, who located the group's car near the entrance. The
friends went into the cave 200 to 300 yards, calling for the
missing group, but stopped when they would have had to crawl.
They pointed their lights into the crawl and continued to call out.
After receiving no response, the would-be rescuers returned to
the entrance and called authorities at 11:30 PM. The sheriff's
office, Bedford County Emergency Medical Service (BCEMS),
and the Volunteer Fire Services responded. Joanna Valesquez
and Brian Bruce of BCEMS found the group in about 10
minutes, about 1500 feet in, on the entrance side of the Hell
Hole Junction. The three denied they were lost and exited the
cave at 1:30 AM.
Michael Clements, Incident Report, 28 December 2007
David Melson, Times-Gazette (Shelbyville, Tennessee), "Safe
escape from cave." 28 December 2007
Comments: They said they were just exploring and had lost track
of time. However, they were expected back in an hour but had
been gone an additional seven hours (not all underground).
Fortunately their flashlights were still working.

---------- Page 20 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 5 January
Rio Camuy Cave, Puerto Rico
rock-fall, fatality
While walking on a standard visitor tour, a woman from
California was hit by falling rocks. The woman died from her
injuries. The cave tours were closed to the public and re-opened
on February 15, 2008.
Gwenn, www.puertoricodaytrips.com/2007/12/02/rio-camuy-
caves-park/, 8 February 2008
Comments: It was the first fatality to occur on the public tours
portion of the park.


********** 22 January
Cueva El Gran Plano, Puebla, Mexico
caver fall, injury, aid
Arthur Meauxsoone (21), and Geraldine, Gael and Stephan
Girard were part of a six-person, French and Belgian exploration
and mapping expedition. Arthur was on an expected 20-hour
mapping trip at the -400 meter level when he fell. The five
meter fall broke one foot and injured his knee on the other leg.
Arthur and his team self rescued up to between -200 to -250
meters. They had traveled for more than 30 hours before Arthur
crawled into a sleeping bag to rest.
Teams from Espeleo Rescate Mexico (ERM) arrived and at one
point had 22 members in three teams rigging. A doctor was with
Arthur. The rescue was slowed by some tight meanders, where
they took Arthur out of the stretcher and passed him by hand.
Another obstacle was an 80-meter, unstable pit, where a long
tyrolian was required. They were able to complete the rescue
effort on the fourth day.
Richard Grebeude (in French), translated by Yvonne Droms,
email, "[Texascaver] RE: more news about cave accident in
exico (sic)" 23 January 2008
Richard Grebeude (in French), translated by Yvonne Droms,
email, "[Texascaver] RE: Update Friday 25/1000hrs" 25 January
Bill Mixon, email, "RE: ACA." 21 May 2008
Dario Lopez, Associated Press, "Mexican team completes
successful rescue of injured French cave explorer." 26 January
Comments: The cause of the fall is not available. The cavers
were fined 500 pesos each because they were mapping the cave
on tourist visas, not science visas.


********** 9 March
Indian Rock Cave, Alabama
difficulty on rope, no consequence
Julie Fee (39) was one of a 15-member grotto vertical trip. The
61-foot drop is normally dry, but was wet due to heavy rains
during previous days. The cavers became soaked on the ascents.
Julie started up one climb with Mike Manke providing bottom
tension on the rope. About 10 feet off the floor, Julie called
down that she was having problems climbing. Mike noted that
her right foot chicken-loop had detached from her croll. She was
unable do a change over because her rappel rack was in her
husband's pack, he had already ascended, and she was
unfamiliar with the procedure.
Julie received instructions on how to down climb and when she
descended to within reach, Dave McCrea replaced the tri-link
with a spare oval link and reattached the chicken loop. Julie
completed the climb with bottom tension.
Mike Manke, Incident Report, 5 March 2009
Comments: This incident stresses the importance of always
wearing both ascending and descending equipment when on
rope. The caver needed to be more familiar with the
components in her system. She was unfamiliar with several
vertical self-rescue techniques for common gear issues. In
addition, the climb was complicated due to the waterfall. The
Incident Report noted that a more thorough safety check should
have been performed before letting her get on rope.


********** 20 March
Rainbow Falls Cave, Tennessee
stranded, inadequate equipment, aid, no injury
Youth minister Garry Blakesley (24), his brother Dustin
Blakesley (17), Jake Layman (17), and Chris Smith (20) decided
to go to the bottom of the cave. They left at 10 PM and expected
to return about 6 AM. A permit had not been obtained from the
Park Service. The cave is vertical and wet. Only Garry had
been to any cave before, and that cave was dry and in another
state. Their equipment included four hardware-store-grade nylon
ropes, a single industrial-style class II harness and connecting
links, and a single handled ascender. They wore blue jeans and
cotton shirts. Each had a single hardware store headlamp, and
no one in the group wore a helmet.
They hand-over-handed down the 12-foot climbdown, then
successfully repeated the procedure on the 50-foot, near-vertical
and damp pitch and, the 25-foot deep, very-wet pitch. They
continued along the stream for several hundred feet to the sump
and then started their exit. At the wet, 25-foot high pitch, they
discovered they were unable to ascend safely and retreated back
into the cave to a drier area 500 feet from the entrance. They
huddled together for warmth and waited for rescue.
Garry's wife called authorities at 7:30 AM, reporting the
overdue party. Great Smoky Mountain National Park personnel
checked other cave entrances before finding a pack from the
group outside the Rainbow Falls Entrance. The Knoxville
Rescue Squad's Cave/Vertical Team entered at 11 AM, quickly
rigged and negotiated the climb down and the two vertical drops.
The spelunkers were found cold but uninjured. They were given
proper clothing and equipment, including polypro, cave suits,
hoods, helmets, harnesses, and lights. After re-warming with
blankets and food, the spelunkers were hauled up the two
vertical drops with separate 4:1 MAs. With assistance, they were
out of the cave and at the trailhead by 8:10 PM.

---------- Page 21 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
David Brace, Incident Report, 3April 2008
unattributed, National Park Service, National Park Service
Morning Report, "Great Smoky Mountains National Park-Four
Entrapped Men Rescued From Cave", 24 March 2008
Jack Thomison, Tag-Net. "Rescue at Rainbow Cave." 25 March
Associated Press, Tulsa World (www.tulsaworld.com),
"UPDATED: missing cavers from Owasso found safe, 'cold and
wet'." 21 March 2008
Joel Davis, The Daily Times, "Knoxville Volunteer Emergency
Rescue Squad pull four from Rainbow Falls Cave." 21 March
Comments: Of all of the incorrect things that were done before
and during this trip, two critical decisions were completed
correctly. First, the group told someone where they were going
and when they would be back. Second, when they discovered
they could not safely ascend the pits, they retreated to a safer
area and waited for rescue. Other than those items, they were
very lucky.
The rescue team did an excellent job of locating and evacuating
the spelunkers.


********** 30 March
Malloy's Waterfall Cave, Georgia
difficulty on rope, aid, no injury
During the Florida Cave Crawl, a group of 19, including
teenagers, went to Malloy's Waterfall Cave and split into two
groups to explore. After about three hours of exploring, the
groups headed for the 50-foot-high entrance pit, where some
members from each group climbed out. In the second group,
after completing their exploration, an unnamed teenager in Boy
Scout Troup 173 had trouble negotiating the entrance pit. The
teenager's father ran back to the parking lot to enlist assistance.
Scoutmaster Jeff Vorpagel and members from Boy Scout Troup
173 gathered equipment and went back to the cave. Jeff went
down to the teen. The boy's father helped with setting up a 3:1
MA haul system, including safety prussiks, and worked with two
Scouts, Robert Fox (13) and Chance Vorpagel (15). Cavers on
the trip actively monitored the rescue-in-progress. With the
efforts of the boy's father, Robert and Chance, the haul was
completed. When the scout reached the surface, he ran off to
find something to eat. The Scouts disassembled the haul system
while Jeff and two cavers ascended.
Kathryn Storey, Incident Report-unpublished, 7 May 2008
Wendy Shirah, Bill Putnam, CaveChat, "Scouts rescue young
caver in Florida." 3 April 2008
Kit Bradshaw, Jupiter Courier News, "Jupiter Scouts, leader
rescue young caver in Georgia." 2 April 2008
unnattributed, Jupiter Courier News, "Be Prepared" Jupiter
Scout talks about cave rescue." 3 April 2008
Comments: Articles in the news media used words like:
delirious, hysterical, "in shock" and "everyone had left". None
of these were true. Information from CaveChat and an incident
report paint a much different perspective. The teen, though
tired, was not in an emergency situation. He had also had
problems the previous day. No one had left the area as reported.
To Scoutmaster Jeff Vorpagel's credit, he carried and properly
set up the rescue equipment, and the scouts and father knew how
to use it.


********** 9 April
unnamed cave, Tennessee
caver fall, aid, no injury
Richey Steins was out with his friends riding bikes when he
decided to explore the cave. He was able to negotiate a fence
and soon fell 25 to 30 feet down the entrance. The Johnson City
and Washington County emergency workers were called and
were able to pull him to safety uninjured.
Darius Radzius, WHJL-TV-News Channel 11, "Tri-Cities Teen
Resuced After Falling 25 Feet Into a Cave." 10 April 2008
Comments: Richey was grounded for a month. His mother had
warned him several times about the cave.


********** 15 May
Crystal Cave, California
no consequence, other, dynamite
A Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Park Cave Specialist
discovered what appeared to be unexploded dynamite while
doing planning for a new lighting system in the cave. The
visitors and employees were evacuated from the area, and the
chief regional blaster was notified. The chief regional blaster
and the cave specialist assessed the situation and found three
drill holes that may have contained unexploded charges. The
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) opened the cave for tourists
in the 1930s and created the trails using small explosives. The
explosives may have contained nitroglycerin, which becomes
unstable over time.
The explosives group removed the wires from the three holes
and set off seven small charges to ignite the explosives. They
were unsuccessful. The explosives were later removed from the
drill holes.
unattibuted, National Park Service Morning Report,
"Abandoned explosives found in Crystal Cave." 19 May 2008
Susie Pakoua Vang, The Fresno Bee, "Cave where explosives
found reopened today." 22 May 2008
Comments: Although the discovery of explosives in caves is
very rare, if something is found that is suspected of being an
explosive, leave the materials alone and notify the proper
authorities. Sweating, explosive-appearing minerals can be
particularly deadly, as it is the very unstable nitroglycerin that is
sweating


********** 24 May
Brewers Pit, New Mexico
stranded, aid, inadequate equipment, no injury
Three men, all in their twenties, looked on Google Maps and
noted a large, open-air pit in the El Malpais National Monument.
They recorded the puka's coordinates in a remote part of the lava
fields, and made the hike using a GPS receiver. After locating
the entrance and rappelling the 50-foot-drop with no helmets or
rope pad, they explored the cave until their flashlight (singular)

---------- Page 22 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
began to dim. While preparing to ascend up the rope, their only
One leader with the other students left to get help and blankets.
ascender was dropped into a crevice and was irretrievable. They
The injured girl's wet clothes were removed and she was
were trapped.
wrapped in the dry blankets.
Amazingly, their cell phone had one-bar in the open-air pit and
There were communication difficulties in notifying EMS and
they were able to reach rescue authorities and provide the
describing the cave's location. Two fire departments began the
coordinates of the entrance. Park law enforcement located the
search at opposite ends of the mountain and a group leader was
vehicle and the Albuquerque Mountain Rescue Council (AMRC,
spotted running down a logging road. He led them to the
an MRA team) was called. The three spelunkers were located at
entrance, where the rescuers realized the difficulties involved
4 AM after searchers hiked for several hours. AMRC noted that
and requested assistance.
the sheath on the spelunker's unprotected rope had been cut on
The NCRC telephone network was activated and the first cavers
the sharp basalt during their rappels. AMRC rappelled in,
arrived in an hour. bringing a cache of cave rescue equipment.
provided equipment, and the three were evacuated.
The stream going into the cave entrance was diverted and a
Bob Baker, Tom Russo, AMRC, "Mission Log for mission
phone line was established to the patient's location.
080602," 24 May 2008
Further patient assessment found her lower back pain emanating
Ray Keeler personal notes, unpublished, 24-25 May 2008
from a large bruise on her flank, not from the lower spine area.
Comments: The subjects had not told anyone about their
Her neck pain had gone away. With warming, the patient was in
specific trip plans, only that they intended to be away the whole
good spirits. The 15-foot drop had a tight, sharp turn at the top
weekend. Without the cell phone contact and the entrance
and, with the updated assessment, it was determined flexibility
location coordinates, they would have been in serious trouble, as
and mobility out-weighed spinal immobilization. A 3:1 MA
there are scores of cave entrances within walking distance and
haul and belay were established. The patient agreed to help by
no place to start looking other than the vehicle. Dropping their
negotiating the tight turn while wearing a cervical collar. After
ascender down a crevice may have saved one of their lives, as
the turn, the patient was packaged in a half-SKED and passed to
the rope's mantle was cut just from the three rappels.
the surface. The effort took six hours from the time of the fall
and the patient was out by 1 AM.


********** 30 May
Steve Hazelton, Incident Report, "Falls Cliff Cave Rescue
Lava River Cave, Oregon
Report." 22 July 2008
caver fall, injury, aid
Patrick McArdle, Times Argus-Rutland Herald, "Trapped teen
rescued from Vermont cave." 2 July 2008
Sue Caldwell (42) was on a field trip with a group of McKay
Creek Elementary students, teachers, and chaperones. About
Comments: A belay on the climb would have avoided this entire
one half mile into the cave, Caldwell fell and "heard something
incident. Every use of cable ladder, rope ladder, or etrier should
crack" in her leg. She was unable to walk, so SAR was notified
be belayed.
for extraction, and the Sunriver Fire medics were called for
medical support. The seven SAR personnel used a wheeled litter
for the extraction in the large lava tube.
unattributed, KTVZ.com , "Teacher's aide falls, suffers leg
injury." 30 May 2008
A 13 year-old girl was "hiking" in Fulford Cave near the main
Comments: The rescue was completed by 12:40 PM. It is not
entrance when she fell. She was under the supervision of
known what was the cause of the fall, but the fall occurred in
instructors from the Colorado Climbing School when the fall
reasonably easy, walking passage.
occurred. She injured her knees.
The Vail Mountain Rescue and Greater Eagle Fire Protection


********** 30 June
District collaborated on the rescue.
Falls Cliff Cave, Vermont
Dawn Witlin, Vail Daily, "Girl injured while hiking Fulford
caver fall, trapped, injury, aid
Cave." 8 February 2008
Eight students and three staff of Kroka Expeditions, an outdoor
Comments: It is not apparent whether the girl was in the cave
adventure school, had been exploring Falls Cliff Cave. On the
when the accident occurred.
trip out of the cave, an unnamed 16-year-old girl was climbing a
homemade rope etrier and fell 10 to 15 feet. She had been trying
to maneuver into a tight turn at the top of the drop and did not
have a belay. Even though her fall was cushioned by the group
leaders below, there was a questionable loss of consciousness as
she could not remember the fall. She also had moderate lower
back pain and mild neck pain so, because of the potential for
spinal injuries, the leaders chose to call for help.
church youth group. About 2 PM, she slipped and became


********** 14 July
Fulford Cave, Colorado
caver fall, injury, aid


********** 18 July
Devil's Den Cave, Missouri
caver fall, injury, aid
Bianca Calloway (17) was on her first caving trip as part of a
wedged between triangle-shaped rocks in the Satan's Maze
section near the back of the cave. Friends tried to pull her out
but failed. After others failed in freeing her, Park rangers were

---------- Page 23 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
called, who were unsuccessful as well. The Washington County
SAR Team arrived and was able to free her about 7:30 AM,
using ropes, pulleys, and airbags for anchors. Her injuries were
not life-threatening.
Associated Press, Arkansas Online, "Teen trapped in cave
overnight is rescued." 22 July 2008
Bob Caudle & Charles Huggins, The Morning News,
www.nwaonline.net. "Rescuers Free Girl From Cave." 19 July
Ernie Coffman, CaveChat, "Here's an up-to-date rescue in
Arkansas." 19 July 2008
Comments: Devil's Den receives large groups of ill-equipped
spelunkers, many of which do not even carry their own light.


********** 18 July
unnamed cave, Iowa
caver fall, injury, aid
Austin (16) was on a trip with Camp Wyoming, a church youth
group, in an unnamed cave near Maquoketa Caves State Park's
tourist cave, Dance Hall Cave. He was "wearing spelunking
equipment" and had been in the cave before. About 11 AM and
200 feet into the cave, Austin slipped in the Steel Gate Passage,
a V-shaped passage with a 90-degree turn. As he fell he twisted
and was unable to free himself, even with the help of others. It
appeared his knees were hyper extended.
Group members tried to help but unsuccessfully, so rescue help
was called and the Maquoketa Fire Department responded. The
rescue workers started arriving after an hour and began working
frantically to keep Austin warm, reporting that his temperature
had dropped to 85 degrees. They did not have any cave
communications equipment (phones or cave radios), so they set
up a vocal relay to the surface.
Rescuers used hand chisels to chip away the rock. When those
tools did not work, they called in an extricating team from Rock
Island with compressed air chisels. These workers "chopped off
stalactites because the outcropping of rock was biting into the
young man's chest." They were successful after four hours, and
he was assisted in exiting the cave.
Sheri Melvoid, Quad-City Times, "2 teenagers rescued from
Maquoketa Caves." 18 July 2008
Eileen Mozinski, TH Online, www.thonline.com, "Trapped
teenager pulled from cave." 19 July 2008
Comments: The accounts of this rescue vary substantially on
injuries sustained. An 85-degree body temperature is not a
minor injury and yet the youth was able to walk from the cave.


********** 18 July
unnamed cave, Iowa
caver fall, injury, aid
While the rescue above was underway at Maquoketa Caves State
Park, an 18 year old woman "fell 20 to 25 feet in another part of
the caves" in the park, near the Natural Bridge. This second
incident occurred after the rescue personnel had been working to
free Austin for about two hours. Rescue squad members
strapped the woman to a back board, and hauled her out of the
cave and about a quarter-of-a-mile to a waiting ambulance. A
report on her condition was not available.
Sheri Melvoid, Quad-City Times, "2 teenagers rescued from
Maquoketa Caves." 18 July 2008
Comments: Additional information is not available for this
incident.


********** 21 July
Parachute Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, aid
On Monday evening, just after 10:00 PM, three men went to
Parachute Cave. One of the men fell about 15 to 20 feet and
struck his head. Reports suggest that the man was climbing
down the entrance drop when he fell, and that he did not have
adequate equipment. The injured man was placed on a
backboard and rescued by the fire department's high-angle
rescue team, and taken to an area hospital in critical condition.
Bill Putnam, CaveChat, "Parachute Cave, TN - Accident and
Rescue, July 21, 2008." 28 July 2008
unattributed, WTLV NewsChannel5.com, "Caver Falls 20 Feet,
Lands On His Head." 22 July 2008
unattributed, WSMV.com, "Cave Explorer Hurt In Bellevue." 22
July 2008
Comments: Belay your climbs. This person was not using
correct caving equipment, yet the news reports kept using the
word "caver". In this case, the term spelunker would have been
more appropriate. One report had him going to the hospital in
critical condition, while another report said he was "expected to
be all right".


********** 24 July
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave-Wind Cave, Wyoming
stranded, aid, no injury
Beau Baldock (24), Brian Carpenter (22), and Jake Shell (23)
were doing a pull down trip from Fossil Mountain Ice Cave to
Wind Cave. About 200 feet beyond the 80-foot-high second
pitch they encountered an unexpected ice plug and became
stranded.
A report of an overdue party was called into authorities and the
Teton SAR responded. When the Teton SAR reached the party,
they rigged a rope and provided jumars and a safety belay. Each
of the three cavers ascended under their own power.
Doug Meyer, Incident Report, 2 May 2009
Ray Keeler, telephone interview notes, 2 May 2009
Comments: The SAR team reported that there had not been an
ice plug in this location of the cave in several years, although a
similar rescue had occurred just one year before due to an ice
plug in another location in the cave. How could this incident
been prevented? Checking with others familiar with the cave
would have helped the group to know if a through trip had been
completed this season. Also, leaving the ropes rigged and
retrieving them after the trip's completion could have achieved
the same result if the group had ascending gear.

---------- Page 24 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 27 July
Bowden Cave, West Virginia
lost, aid, no injury
Chuck Hilpert (47), David Ruth (41), Bob Sabilla (46), and
Anthony Sabilla (18) entered the cave at 11AM for a "beginner
trip". Chuck and David are experienced cavers, but Bob and
Anthony were beginners and were wearing cotton, and did not
bring extra food and water. Chuck left a note with his son, who
has had NCRC training, that said who was on the trip and when
they were expected to be out. The note also included names of
cavers who should be called if needed. After a short trip into the
Bear Heaven section to get the new cavers used to tight places,
Bob showed some concerns about the tighter parts of the cave.
The plan was to make a trip into the Groundhog Entrance (Back
Entrance) on an expected three-hour trip.
They went past the Harry Traverse in good shape, but when they
arrived at the Bedding Plane Crawl, Bob decided he was not up
for 100 yards of crawling. It was decided that Bob would wait
there for the return of the other three, who were expected to be
back before 2 PM. If Bob got cold, he would go and wait
outside. Chuck, Dave, and Anthony completed the traverse to
the collapse, but on the return trip, in the Bedding Plane Crawl,
Chuck made a turn towards the Bear Heaven section. They
decided to check out that area for awhile. Then, back at the
Bedding Plane Crawl, they took another wrong turn. The 20-
minute-long crawl had become more than 5 hours. Chuck was
completely lost and they decided wait for help. Anthony said,
"What happened to the Joe-Pro Cavers that I came in here
with?" They moved away from the water and air movement to a
comfortable location, and began the long wait.
Bob grew cold and tired of waiting in the cave and went out on
his own. At about 6 PM, Bob called Chuck's wife. Cavers were
contacted, who responded. Bob also called 911 about 8 PM and
had to flag down a passing motorist to ask his location to give to
the dispatcher.
Several cavers and local firemen arrived and multiple search
teams were organized. The group was found at 1 AM and exited
the cave without injury.
Chuck Hilpert, Incident Report, "Bowden Aca (sic) report." 22
May 2009
Brian Masney, email (unpublished), "WV caving incident." 14
September 2008
Brian Masney, email (unpublished), "WV caving incident." 22


********** May 22, 2009
Comments: Chuck had been in the cave many times before, but
still became lost. To help avoid getting lost, it is very helpful to
turn around regularly to see what the cave looks like coming
from the other direction.


********** 27 July
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
caver fall, injury, no aid
Matt Covington, Peter Bosted, Andy and Bonny Armstrong,
Mark Andrich, and Shawn Thomas were on a six-person, week-
long exploration camp trip to push leads and climbs in the
Southwest region of the cave. On the first day of exploration,
after camping at the Big Sky camp, Matt, Peter, and Bonny went
to the northeast part of the Chandelier Maze. After getting
turned around a couple of times in the maze, they found and
ascended a 90-foot-long static rope to a small ledge. This was
the end of the previous year's exploration. Peter put Matt on
belay and Matt free climbed a 20 foot "horizontal" passage that
was then rigged for the others. After 180 feet of heavily
decorated walking passage, they arrived at a good lead up a 60
degree slope with a 10-to-15-foot overhung section at the
bottom.
From the 20-degree slope floor, Matt reached up, placed a solid
tricam, and stepped up into an etrier with Bonny providing a
belay. Matt tried several times to place additional protection
into the numerous holes and cracks in the gypsum, but was
unable to find a suiable placement. In Matt's words, they
"seemed to have dirt in them". Peter offered to spot from the
bottom, but the offer was declined. A second piece of protection
was placed and after loading, seemed to hold. Since he was only
about 5 feet off the ground, Matt decided to unclip the belay
from the first anchor and begin the belay from the second
anchor.
While leaving his right foot in the first etrier, Matt then placed
his left foot in the second anchor's etrier. At 5:15 PM, without
warning, the second piece suddenly blew out and Matt fell
backwards to the ground, landing in a sitting position with one
foot in each etrier. It was obvious from the unnatural angle of
Matt's left forearm, and a small amount of blood, that he had
suffered a compound fracture. Bonny and Peter feared the worst
when Matt momentarily passed out. When he came to, he was
able to pull the arm out straight in an attempt to set the bones to
a less painful position. This caused a second loss of
consciousness. When Matt regained consciousness, Bonny and
Peter completed a primary survey and found no other broken
bones or evidence of internal injury. Matt took four 200mg
tablets of Ibuprofen to help prevent swelling
They made a splint of Bonny's Swaygo cave pack, wrapping it
completely around the arm from the wrist to elbow, then
wrapped the pack with a sticky ace bandage and used a sling to
hold it up. They decided to leave all of the lead climbing gear
and head for the surface to receive medical help as soon as
possible.
Peter put Matt on belay to rappel down to the narrow ledge
above the 90-foot fixed rope with Bonny waiting to receive
Matt. They repeated the sequence on the 90-foot rappel. This
pitch was free hanging for 50 feet and too fast for Matt's rack, so
Peter lowered Matt with a dynamic rope. They packed up all
food, water, and dynamic ropes on hand and slowly made it back
to the Tinsel Town Trail after scouting for obstacles. Matt was
spotted and belayed on exposed and steep places, but basically
made it on his own down to the main trail.
After leaving notes at points entering and leaving the Chandelier
Ballroom, Bonny went to the Big Sky camp (30 minutes farther
into the cave) to gather bivy gear for the trip out, and freeze
dried meals for the whole team, stove, and two pads. She left
another note for the other team at camp. Meanwhile Matt and
Peter started out, making great progress, but Matt had trouble
avoiding bumping his injured arm in the crawly maze. This was
remedied by trying a pair of Peter's silk long underwear around

---------- Page 25 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Matt to help hold his arm close to his chest. At 9:50 PM, on her
way out, Bonny made contact with the second team who were
surveying near the main trail. They retrieved their vertical gear
and caught up with Peter's team as Matt was ascending out of
the Le barge Borehole under his own power. He also completed
the Little White Bastard pitch on his own with little help.
The six had a meal at the EF Junction. At 3:15 AM, Peter and
Shawn went to the surface to notify the Carlsbad Caverns
National Park personnel that a rescue was in progress and the
team was moving well. Matt made most of the rest of the trip
out on his own with assistance at spots and one haul near the
beginning of the Rift. At Boulder Falls, the team decided on
using a climbing counter balance haul with belays for each
climber. However, the team did not have a proper prussic-
minding pulley and the pulley available was deemed
untrustworthy for this. Everyone had been up almost 24 hours at
this point, so each move had to be confirmed for safety from
each position on the haul. Even so, with loading, the haul line
became tangled with the belay lines. They were eventually
untangled and Matt continued to the surface under his own
power.
Matt was taken to Carlsbad by arriving surface rescue personnel
for surgery on his arm.
Andy Armstrong, "Lechuguilla Cave Expedition Report July 26-
August 2, 2008." 12 September 2008
Stan Allison, email-unpublished, "ACA report" 12 September
Matt Covington, email-unpublished, "Re: ACA report" 12
September 2008
Comments: Matt's fall was a direct result of the failure of gear
placement. The rock blew out around the piece. Matt identified
three things that could have been done differently. He denied a
spot from Peter,, he had each foot in separate etriers, and he
unclipped from a good piece and committed solely to a dubious
one. Correcting any of these may have lessened the impact.
This was an excellent self rescue.


********** 13 August
Wayne's Cave, Tennessee
injury, no aid
Brenda Shultheis (44), Johnny Shultheis (24), Josh Shultheis
(18), and John Shultheis (44) and Tim McCain (44) decided to
do the famous "to camp 4 and back" trip. Wayne's Cave has a
1,250-foot-long crawl that is known to have claimed many
cavers' knees. The group was making good progress 300 feet
into the crawl when Brenda's pack, which was attached to her
ankle, caught on a rock while her leg was in a weird position.
When she lifted her leg to move forward, Brenda heard a loud
pop and felt a horrible pain in her knee.
She tried crawling further for a short bit but realized this was a
poor decision. With help from John and Tim, she was able to
reverse the crawl and make it up some short climbs. Follow-up
medical evaluation showed a slight tear in the ACL and MCL
requiring physical therapy.
Brenda Shultheis CaveChat, "Wayne's cave (sic) self rescue!"


********** 25 August 2008
Comments: Though easier on the arms in long crawls, pulling a
pack attached to one's ankle has its risks.


********** 21 August
unnamed ice cave, near Snoqualmie Pass
Washington
ice cave collapse, injury, aid
Alec Corbett (17) and Alessandro Gelmini (14) were hiking on
Denny Creek with a group that included their mothers and
younger sisters. The group came upon an ice cave with a stream
coming out of it. At 1:15 PM, Alec and Alessandro went into
the ice cave about 15 feet in walking passage when a church
group came up and started taking pictures. Most of the cave
then collapsed with a deafening crash. Everyone converged on
the collapse to help, but Alec and Alessandro were buried under
6 to 15 feet of ice and snow, but some of the ice blocks were five
feet in diameter. They tried to use sticks to dig but there was no
way to cut through the ice.
Joni Corbett (Alec's mother) called 911 and was able to provide
accurate enough directions for a rescue helicopter to locate
Snoqualmie Pass, the nearest flat spot for a landing zone. SAR
crews hiked to the incident site with tools including chain saws.
They attacked the ice through the afternoon in a steady rain,
cutting up the ice into one foot cubes for moving.
About three hours after the collapse, they made contact with
Alessandro and were able to cut him out about an hour later. A
Blackhawk helicopter was brought in to fly him out. Alessandro
had been able to breath through small spaces between the ice
blocks. Alec Corbett was pulled free by 6:45 PM. Both boys
had broken backs. Alessandro's other injuries included a broken
cheek bone, nose bone, ankle and bone chips in his foot. Both
were in serious condition and air lifted via a helicopter short
haul.
Peyton Whitely, Seattle Times, "2 teens rescued from ice cave.


********** 22 August 2008
Brad Wong, Seattle PI, "Lot of skill, bit of luck saved boys." 23
August 2008
unattibuted, www.mynorthwest.com, "Both Seattle boys from ice
cave have broken backs." 22 August 2008
Comments: Both boys recovered. While making the 911 call,
Joni tried to climb into the just collapsed cave and had to be
talked out of it by the dispatcher. Others in the group started
climbing onto the ice collapse looking for ways in, and had to be
strongly told to get off before causing another collapse.
The SAR team's initial intent for the chain saw was to cut trees
for a landing zone. Cutting away the ice was a better use.


********** 31 August
Ain't Barbwire Cave, Arizona
caver fall, no consequence
Graham Schindel (19), Vince Bronson, Christina Jan, Larry
Zimmer, Edd Poon, and Robert Goforth were on a trip to the
back of the cave. The trip was during the monsoon season in
Arizona, and there was some apprehension about rain since there
are several stream crawls and some places where the forest litter

---------- Page 26 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
is wedged in the ceiling. After four hours, the team reached a
12-feet-deep, slightly overhung pit near the back of the cave.
The rope was rigged on a stout-looking rock, and Graham started
the short rappel first, backing over the edge. Just as his picture
was being taken, Graham disappeared over the edge along with
the rope. The stout rock had snapped off, and Graham had fallen
onto the jagged rocks below.
The five other members had a collective "sick feeling' as Robert
quickly went to the lip and looked over at Graham below.
Graham had fallen backwards about 10 feet. He was wearing a
helmet and had a long cave pack that may have helped protect
him from the fall. Graham got up, said he was "OK." and threw
the rope up for re-rigging to several rocks and the trip continued.
Robert Goforth, Incident Report (unpublished), "Ain't Barbed
Wire," 18 August 2009
Comments: Robert noted that they were hurried and distracted
because of the rain outside. In addition, the drop seemed so
inconsequential that they did not pay enough attention to double
checking the anchor and having a proper backup. Check your
rigging and check other people's rigging.
27 or 28 September
unnamed cave, Belize
fatality, drowning
Linda Linan (52) and her husband Eduardo were on a Carnival
cruise when they decided to go on an adventure trip tubing
through a cave in Belize. It was advertised as a lazy float down
the river on a dark-cave tubing excursion. In one part of the
cave, the strong current headed straight into a wall pushing more
and more tubers in from behind. The guide started yelling "Turn
right, turn right." Linda and Eduardo hit the cave wall and
flipped over. Eduardo was pulled from the river by another
tourist. When Linda was found, a nurse and a policeman
performed CPR but they were unsuccessful. Carnival Cruise
Lines has suspended further cave tubing trips and is
investigating what happened.
unattributed, v.WFTV.com/news, "Woman Says She Warned
Cruise Line 2 Years Before tubing Passenger Died!" 30
September 2008
Comments: After the initial article was published, a reader came
forward with a similar story from two years earlier regarding a
Carnival Cruise dark-cave tubing tour. With almost 100 tourists
there were just two cave guides. The rushing water knocked her
from her tube and she had to be pulled to safety by the other
tourists.


********** 18 October
Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico
fatality, heart attack
During the Fort Stanton Study Group's week-long October
Expedition, Mike Bilbo, Joe Koby, and Jeff Jackson led an
orientation trip for members of the El Paso Archeological
Society (EPAS). Eleven were on the expected three-hour trip,
including Tom Gulczynski (57). They went to 20 Steps with
several rest and interpretive stops along the way. After a 20-
minute talk, they went through the 600-foot-long Crystal Crawl
and onto the Inscription Site for another short talk. After
looking at the formations, they started their return trip. Mike
sent Joe out of the cave to report in that the group would miss
their exit time but everything was OK. About 200 feet from the
entrance side of the Crystal Crawl, at 4:45 PM, Tom told Jeff
that he felt tired and they stopped the crawl. Then Tom laid
down on his left side, passed out, and started heavy, labored
breathing. Jeff and another person unbuckled Tom's helmet,
took off his pack, and removed anything restrictive to Tom's
breathing. Then they could not detect breathing and the faint
pulse disappeared.
Mike sent Jeff to notify expedition members on the surface of
the emergency and that they were initiating CPR. Mike pulled a
micro-shield out of his cave pack, then realized he had not told
Jeff to call for paramedics. He put Christian Bilbo in charge and
headed out. At the top of 20 Steps he ran into Sam Bono's team,
including Jennifer Boyette and Carol Lucero. Jennifer and Carol
went to the incident site, where Jennifer took over IC and CPR.
Sam went to the surface to alert others via radio. Mike then met
another team of Jennifer Foote and Ron Lipinski, who went to
the rescue site where Foote alternated CPR with Boyette and
EPAS members. Ron became the cave-to-surface
communications runner and took an updated patient status to the
surface. Mike then led the remaining EPAS members out of the
cave.
At 5:20 PM, as the EPAS group was leaving, they met Jeff with
the paramedics coming in. A litter team followed. The CPR had
continued for almost an hour when the paramedic called for a
stop. The body was packaged and reached the surface at 8 PM.
Mike Bilbo, Incident Report-unpublished, "FSC Fatality Report"


********** 25 October 2008
Comments: Tom was found to have had a heart attack. The Fort
Stanton expeditions are well attended with multiple projects
being completed, at multiple surface sites in the area. When
Sam Bono radioed the call out they all responded immediately.


********** 1 December
unnamed cave near Pembroke, Kentucky
fatality, cave dig collapse
Devin William Peters (42) and another man were digging for
Native American artifacts in an unnamed, western Kentucky
cave when the walls of their excavation trench collapsed,
covering Devin. The two had been working in the trench and the
area for several years. The second man was above ground and
called for help at 4 PM. Devin was found in the excavation
trench, 8 feet below the floor of the cave, buried under 4 feet of
dirt, about four hours after the collapse. His body was extracted
90 minutes later.
Alan Reed, Kentucky New Era, "Arrowhead hunter dies in dig
collapse", 2 December 2008
Comments: Despite the abhorrence amongst cavers about this
activity, something can be learned from this incident. Shore up
your digs.

---------- Page 27 ----------
2008 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 8 December
Byers Cave, Alabama
lost, aid, no injury
Two unnamed men decided to go to Fox Mountain to find a
cave. Each had one flashlight, but no helmet or other
equipment. At 2 AM, December 9th, the wife of one of the two
spelunkers called her neighbor, Steven Driver, asking for help to
find them. Steven checked two popular nearby caves (both
vertical), but found no ropes at the entrances and did not go in.
Common Caving Mistakes and Consequences
1. Primary light failed; did not carry backup lights, or backup lights inadequate - stranded.
2. No map, no guide, and poor route-finding skills - lost.
3. Wore inadequate or inappropriate clothing for conditions - hypothermia.
4. Did not bring extra clothing - hypothermia.
5. Moving but not paying attention - caver fall.
6. Free-climbing more than a body-length without belay - caver fall.
7. Traversing above drop without belay or safety line - caver fall.
8. Ignored rainy weather forecast; entered water cave - flood entrapment or drowning.
9. Careless movement in tight passage or crevice - stuck.
10. Entered bat cave or passage without precautions - histoplasmosis.
11. Solo caving and something went wrong - stranded.
12. Did not tell anyone of plans - delayed rescue by hours or days.
13. Did not clear loose rocks from lip - struck by falling rock.
14. Climbing or descending rope hand-over-hand - lost grip and fell.
15. Climbing cable ladder without belay - fell off.
16. Lost control of rappel; no bottom belay or rappel safety - fell to the bottom.
17. Out of shape or unfamiliar with climbing system - stranded on rope.
18. Did not know how to change from rappel to climb or from climb to rappel - stranded on rope.
19. Hair or clothing stuck in rappel device; did not know how to recover - stranded on rope.
20. Rappelling without wearing climbing system - stranded in pit or on rope.
21. Attempted pull-down trip without map or guide - stranded.
22. Sharing vertical gear; lost equipment passing it up or down the pit - stranded.
23. Did not tie a knot in the end of the rope - rappelled off the end and fell.
24. Moving around lip of pit without being belayed or being on rope - fell into pit.
25. Did not check attachment of rappel device to harness - became detached from rappel device and fell.
He then checked Byers Cave and found them at the bottom.
away from the waterfall. They were lost and cold, but otherwise
uninjured SO he gave them some energy bars and showed them
the way out. It took Steven about 7 1/2 hours to locate and assist
the spelunkers.
Steven Driver, CaveChat, "lost but found in byers (sic)" 12
December 2008
Comments: Further comments from Steven show this is a
repeatedly occurring scenario.

---------- Page 28 ----------
Previously Unreported Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
Previously Unreported Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
March 1993
unnamed sinkhole, near Merida Mexico
fatality, MX oxygen toxicity
A full cave and nitrox instructor suffered an oxygen
convulsion during a deep air dive in a sinkhole in Mexico and
drowned. His partner, who experienced CNS toxicity warning
signs during the dive, and a safety diver survived. The two
later recovered the body.
The team had planned a 20-minute air dive in excess of 230
fsw (71 msw) the depth of the saltwater halocline in a
cavernous open-water sinkhole near Merida on the Yucatan
Peninsula. Because of the difficulty in obtaining helium mixes
in Mexico, the team decided to conduct the dive on air,
followed by oxygen for decompression. Both were
experienced deep divers. A weighted descent line was rigged
for navigation and for staging oxygen and extra air cylinders.
The safety diver was to descend with the team to 220 fsw,
ascend to a shallower depth, and wait for the dive team.
After a long, slow descent past the halocline, the team tied into
the descent line to explore the well at a leisurely pace.
Informed sources estimated their maximum depth to be close
to 300 fsw (92 msw) (A PO2 in excess of 2.0 atm-e.d.). The
surviving partner experienced a tingling in his lower lip and
turned back to call the dive, only to see the diver headed back
as well. When he reached the line, he sensed that the diver was
in trouble. The diver grabbed the line and began a hurried
hand-over-hand ascent. The partner reached the diver, gained
control, and they began to ascend together. The diver
continued to pull on the line creating slack and getting himself
tangled. His partner cut him free. The diver then darted
upward, got tangled again, and apparently convulsed. By the
time his partner reached him the diver's regulator was out of
his mouth. At that point they were still deeper than 230 fsw
(71 msw). After repeated attempts to force the regulator back
into the diver's mouth with no success, the surviving partner
realized the diver "was gone" and left the body entangled in
the line, and ascended to complete his decompression.
Following decompression, the partner and safety diver were
able to pull up the line and recover the body.
Jeff Bozanic, incident summary, June 2009, reprinted with
permission
Comments: This incident was listed without summary in the
1993 American Caving Accidents and is being re-listed with
the summary.
September 1993
Wakulla County, Florida
fatality, drowning
A very experienced 24-year-old cave diver lost consciousness
and drowned while negotiating a restriction on the way back
to the team's decompression stages, following a deep mix
exploration push to a depth of about 220 fsw/66 msw with a
planned bottom time of 120 minutes.
The inbound leg of the dive which was the latest in a series of
progressive pushes intended to connect several major sinks,
had gone as scheduled. The team of three reached the end of
the line in good time and added about 800 feet of line (7800
feet back at a depth of about 220 fsw/66 msw) when the diver
"unexpectedly" called the dive. The team turned for home.
Upon reaching their staging area, the lead diver turned to see
the diver tangled in the line struggling with his stage. The
third diver freed him and they continued, although the diver
appeared shaken.
As the diver negotiated the "short cut" restriction at about 200
fsw/ 61 msw and 2000 feet back, his scooter prop caught and
ate the line, halting his forward motion and pinning him
between the floor and the ceiling just as his stage bottle ran
out of gas. He flashed an "Out-of-Gas" signal to the lead diver,
who responded with his long hose. Thinking the diver was out
of gas (he actually had 1000 psi in his 104s and 1000 psi in his
other stage), the lead diver passed him a stage bottle. The
diver gave back the long hose and jettisoned his old stage. At
this point the cave silted up, and the lead diver lost visual
contact.
From the rear, the third diver saw his teammate wedged in the
restriction and initiated touch contact as the cave silted out.
The third diver squeezed his leg to indicate "Go" and the diver
kicked. He backed off then squeezed again with no response.
He tried to pry him free and at some point realized the diver
was dead. The third diver unclipped his scooter and stage
bottles and was able to squeeze around the unconscious diver
in the cloud of silt. He then made physical contact with the
lead diver.
Silted out and under the time constraints of their gas supply,
the remaining two divers linked up and motored back to the
safety of the decompression bottles. The two had about six
hours of decompression remaining.
The incident generated serious discussion in the cave
community regarding the role of a dive team and how much
push is too much. Reportedly the diver couldn't sleep the night
before, had ill feelings about the dive, and exhibited anxiety.
He told at least one person that this was the last of these dives
he would do. It was reported that the diver was "off" that day
and that he may have chosen to go ahead SO as not to miss the
"big" dive and lose status.
Jeff Bozanic, incident summary, June 2009, reprinted with
permission.
Comments: You should not dive if you do not feel right about
the dive.

---------- Page 29 ----------
Previously Unreported Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
September 1993
Little River, Florida
fatality, drowning
A novice cave diver ran out of gas and drowned on a solo dive
in the Little River Cave System. The diver was found with no
air in either of his independent 104 tanks about 1300 feet back
in the cave on the mainline. Though the individual frequently
made solo dives, he was not diving with a "buddy bottle."
The diver was known to use "creative" gas management rules
outside of the basic tenets of cave diving. On at least one
occasion, he had explained the gas management strategy he
utilized to a group of cave students. Basically the diver
reserved sufficient gas to exit from known points in the cave
using the outflow in the system. The problem is that
liberalized gas management rules such as this leave no margin
for error or the unexpected, compared to the golden "rule of
thirds" or better (i.e. use no more than 1/3 of your gas for
penetration and exit on the remaining two thirds).
Members of the recovery team speculate that the diver
ventured into an unfamiliar part of the cave and got lost in the
low silty tunnels and "tees." Having silted out the area, the
diver spent precious time searching for the main line
connection and likely missed the tee on the way back.
Eventually he found his way to the line but it was too late. A
long-time Aqua Corps subscriber, he had renewed his
subscription only a week before.
Jeff Bozanic, incident summary, June 2009, reprinted with
permission.
Comments: None.
April 1994
Big Boil Blue Hole Cave System, Abaco,
Bahamas
three fatalities, drowning
Three "untrained" open water divers ran out of gas and
drowned in the Big Boil Blue Hole Cave System. None of the
divers were cavern or cave certified.
It was reported that the three divers entered the low. silty Big
Boil cave with only two guide lines. Two of the divers carried
single 72 cf tanks. The third carried a single 80 cf tank.
The team leader who reportedly had "dived Big Boil many
times before," made the dive without a depth gauge, BC, knife
or redundant second stage. The team apparently made about
150foot/46 meters penetration to a depth of 75 f/23 m.
Two of the bodies were recovered on the mainline at what is
believed to have been their point of maximum penetration.
One of the divers was tangled in the line. The body of the
team leader was located after an extensive search, in a
restricted side passage approximately 150 feet/46 meters off
the mainline.
Bozanic, incident summary, June 2009, reprinted with
permission. Information from submission by Al Pertner.
Comments: No amount of open water training prepares a
diver for cave diving.
May 1994
Blue Hole, Grand Bahamas
two fatalities, drowning
Two very experienced divers (who were not cave certified) got
lost in a popular Blue Hole during a live-aboard dive trip, ran
out of gas, and drowned. Neither diver was running a line or
carrying multiple lights.
One of the divers was found within 100 feet/30m of the cavern
zone in about 90 feet (/28 m). The second body was recovered
by a cave recovery team the next day at about 400 feet
(122meters) from the cave entrance in about 120 feet (37 m)
of water. Both were wearing single 80 cf tanks. It is not
known if the bodies were separated by the tidal flow in the
system, or if the team had been separated during the dive.
The cavern zone at the site is often dived by recreational
divers from a live-aboard boat. A partner of one of the
deceased who was on the dive boat believed that the two "had
no intention of making a cave dive," and in fact, had left line
reels on the boat. One of the divers was going shell collecting.
The other was apparently planning to shoot video. The partner
believes that the two became intrigued and ventured out of the
cavern zone and into the cave system. Ironically, the two were
considered the most experienced divers on the live-aboard trip.
One of the divers was a former commercial and military diver,
was open circuit mix trained, and had worked as a dive master
with a technical diving operation. The other was a dive store
owner, a 20-year instructor and was in the process of
completing a cave course.
Jeff Bozanic, incident summary, June 2009, reprinted with
permission.
Comments: None.
April 1995
Mayan Cenote, Mexico
two fatalities, drowning
Two experienced cave divers (ages 45 and 38) ran out of air
and died after missing a turn while trying to exit a cave dive in
Mexico. The two were among a group of seven cave divers
who had broken into three teams for a 45-minute dive on air at
depths no greater than 60 f/ 18 m. The pair was on the third
team to enter the cave. Besides making an incorrect turn while
trying to exit, the divers failed to use safety reels to mark a
jump and apparently missed or disregarded a series of line
markers pointing the direction to the exit.
On their way into the cave, all three teams used a main tunnel
known as B. They passed in sequence through a T-turn, where
the divers expected a jump. However, instead the cave came to
a T. with three line markers marking the correct direction to
turn while returning to go to the exit. A member of the second
team repositioned one of the markers to make it more visible.

---------- Page 30 ----------
Previously Unreported Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
The third team into the cave called their dive earliest as
planned, since the first two teams were stronger swimmers and
wanted to penetrate further. The two divers then headed back,
but turned in the wrong direction at the T, apparently missing
all three line markers at the spot. Their mistake led them 300
f/91 m to the end of B tunnel, where another route leads to the
A tunnel. The divers headed into the A tunnel, which also led
to an exit, crossing a visual gap without setting up a safety reel
to mark their path.
The divers then made a series of errors and apparently missed
several indicators that should have told them that they were
following a different path than the one they had entered by.
The divers made it to the end of the line marking the start of
the A tunnel, about 30 feet from an exit. Rather than exiting,
the team headed back into the A tunnel, passing as many as 14
line markers pointing back toward the entrance they'd just left.
The divers then swam past the unmarked jump which might
have led them back to the other dive teams.
When the third team did not return from the dive, the other
five divers notified local authorities and asked for help. Later
that day, the divers returned to the cave and recovered the
bodies of the two divers. Their moves were reconstructed by
the other members of the team, one of whom had entered the
A tunnel after completing his dive in an attempt to find the
missing divers. He noticed silt at the entrance, indicating that
the missing team had recently been there, but because of low
air had to turn back before going far enough into the tunnel to
find them. One of the divers had made between 75 and 100
cave dives; the other had some 150 cave dives.
A cave diving instructor with the group commented that the
series of errors apparently made were inexplicable given the
level of experience between the two divers.
Jeff Bozanic, incident summary, June 2009, reprinted with
permission.
Comments: None.

---------- Page 31 ----------
2007 Cave Diving Incident Reports
2007 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 14 February
Allen Mill Pond Spring, Florida
fatality, drowning, out of air
Ron Simmons (53) had been mapping Allen Mill Pond Spring
during the last several years. He had done this primarily through
solo trips and had accumulated 2524 feet of survey. The cave is
very small, silty, and contains two maze-like conduits. The
survey showed that the cave is 46 feet deep in the back, but most
of the cave is at the 30-foot level. The cave requires side-mount
tanks for exploration. Ron's log book showed 43 previous dives
in the cave.
When Ron failed to return from an exploration dive, Wes Skiles
called local law enforcement to check for a vehicle, but none
was found. On February 15th, Wes and Jill Heinerth located
Ron's vehicle by a nearby spring vent in a wooded area, and
called the Lafayette County Sheriff's Office. Rescue and
recovery personnel began to arrive within one half hour. At 3:55
PM, Mark Long began a recon dive. Mark returned in just under
one hour after penetrating 650 feet. He did not find Ron.
After review of the map (work-in-progress) and Ron's notes, it
was determined that Mark had gone into a different tunnel of the
maze than Ron's expected dive for the day. At 5:06 PM, Mark
began a second dive to mark the route for a follow-up diver. At
5:48 PM, Mark returned to the surface with Ron's body. Ron
was found about 300 feet from the entrance and in a swimming
position. Ron had a regulator in his mouth with a second
regulator trailing. Both tanks were found empty and the survey
slate showed 238 feet of new survey on the trip. Ron's
equipment showed he had been no deeper than 28 feet below the
surface.
Jill Heinerth and Gerald Murphy, Incident Report, 18 February
Karen Voyles, Gainsville Sun, "Man dead after Suwannee River
cave diving." 16 February 2006
Comments: Ron was an extraordinary, prolific explorer who
created some of the most detailed and descriptive underwater
cave maps. He was a highly talented craftsman who built much
of his own diving equipment and critical safety equipment for
dry cavers (for example, the Simmons Roller). His gear was
highly-specialized and found to be as organized and tidy as his
survey work. Even in the face of being unable to reach the
surface, it appears as though he worked to survive until the very
last moment.


********** 19 February
Catfish Hole, Florida
fatality, drowning, out of air
Bobby Rothel (19) and two friends were cavern diving when
they became separated. They were diving in an area where an
overhead obstruction does not allow direct access to the surface.
Levy County Sheriff's Office was called, and Bobby's body was
found by rescue divers in the Catfish Hole area of Manatee
Springs. Authorities would not comment on how the victim had
become trapped below the surface. His tanks were out of air.
Alice Wallace, Gainsville Sun, "Scuba diver dies at springs in
Chiefland." 20 February 2007
Comments: Little additional information has been gathered on
this fatality.


********** 5 March
Jackson Blue Spring, Florida
fatality, drowning, stuck, exceeded training
Harry Milliser (48) was an open water diver with 20 years of
experience. His dive partner, Gordon Smith (58), had completed
his basic cave-diving certification. Harry became stuck in a
narrow part of a side passage, and Gordon went to the surface
for help.
Edd Sorenson, an experienced cave diver, arrived 12 minutes
after the 911 call was made with hopes of saving Harry. He was
in the water three minutes later and used a motorized scooter to
reach Harry as quickly as possible. After 600 to 700 feet of
clear water, Edd encountered a cloud of thick silk. He went
down a side passage on the left and found Milliser's body at a
96-foot depth, four minutes into the search. Harry had drowned
after abandoning his dive gear and trying to swim out of the
cave. His tanks still contained air.
David Angier, Panama City News Herald, "Panic led to diver's
death." 7 March 2007
Kate McCardell, Jackson County Floridan, "Man who died cave
diving was Marianna resident." 7 March 2007
Kate McCardell, Jackson County Floridan via WMBB News 13,
"Diver Identified." 6 March 2007
Comments: After being unable to free his dive gear, it appears
that Milliser's panic contributed to his death when he abandoned
his dive gear with air still in the tanks.


********** 16 March
Madison Blue Spring, Florida
fatality, drowning, illness, possible heart attack
Dean Barnhart was leading a two-person dive team at Madison
Blue Spring. As the team was exiting through Potter's Delight,
Dean appeared to have some kind of trouble at the stage room.
His buddy attempted to assist and obtain a response but was
unsuccessful. He returned to the surface to alert authorities.
A recovery team assembled, the buddy was interviewed, and a
recovery plan was created. Ken Clizbe entered at Martz Sink to
retrieve the body. Meanwhile, Bonnie Stelzenmuller installed a
line from the main basin to the gold line. This allowed them to
exit via the main basin and provide assistance as needed.
The cause of the incident was speculated to be a heart attack.
There was sufficient air in Dean's tanks for a proper exit. The
gas mixture was verified independently to be correct. The
recovery team filled their tanks from the same source which had

---------- Page 32 ----------
2007 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
recently had its gas tested. Additional information is not
available.
Ken Hill, Cave Diver's Forum, "Madison Blue Fatality." 17
March 2007
Ken Clizbe and Bonnie Steizenmuller, Cave Diver's Forum,
"Madison Blue Fatality." 19 March 2007
Comments: Limited information has been distributed about the
cause of death.


********** 14 July
The Crack, Withlacoochee River, Florida
fatality, drowning, illness
An unnamed woman (28), Tim Halbach, and Wayne Kinard
were on their second dive of the day. Their plan was to follow
the main line until they had used 1/3 of their air and then return.
Tanks were filled with 24/25 trimix due to the depth of the dive.
2008 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 1 February
Forty Fathom Grotto, Florida
fatality, drowning
Rebecca Harden (54) was part of a scuba group with an
instructor. As the group was ascending, the divers would stop at
various levels. At one of the stages, the instructor noted that
Rebecca was no longer with the group. He saw bubbles and
descended, and brought her to the surface. They performed CPR
on Rebecca until the Marion County Fire Rescue arrived. They
were unsuccessful in the resuscitation efforts.
Luther Monroe, CDNN www..cdnn.info, "Scuba diving
accidents kills woman at 40 Fathom Grotto." 1 February 2008
Austin Miller, Star Banner - www.ocala.com "Diver dies in 40
Fathom Grotto incident." I February 2008
Comments: None.


********** 11 March
Devil's Ear, Florida
fatality, drowning, exceeded experience
Mark Fyvie (35) was on a solo rebreather dive in the Devil's Ear
portion of Ginnie Springs, starting in around noon. The
rebreather allowed him to stay underwater longer than if he had
been using scuba. The dive plan was extreme. He planned to go
to the end of the line on the rebreather, remove it, and continue
with the side mounted scuba tanks through some tight
constrictions, lay more line, and survey.
When he failed to return by 9 PM, Cory Mearns began searching
and after 1 1/2 hours, Mark's body was located, 3800 feet into the
system. His body was removed from the cave the following day
due to safety concerns for the recovery team.
It appears Mark had completed the survey portion of the dive
plan, as his body was found with an empty reel and survey data
in his log book. The evidence supports the fact that he used
During the return trip's ascent at approximately 145 feet, Tim
signaled to Wayne that the victim was having a problem. Her
hands were clenched, her arms shaking violently, and her
regulator was out of her mouth. Both Tim and Wayne worked
together to try and replace the regulator and get her out of the
cave. This was delayed due to the required 12 to 15 minute
decompression requirements. As soon as possible, Tim exited
and called 911. Approximately 30 minutes had elapsed since the
start of the difficulties.
Wayne Kinard, Incident Report, "The Crack." 19 July 2006
Comments: All three team members held proper certifications
and were properly equipped. The victim had completed 40 plus
cave dives in the last year. Her equipment was in very good
condition.
more gas than he should have after dropping the rebreather, and
his computer showed he had spent about an hour on Scuba after
leaving the rebreather. When he returned to the rebreather, he
was followed by silt that deteriorated visibility. The unattended
rebreather had not been secured correctly and the loop flooded.
Mark had a safety bottle only 50 feet away that had not been
used. He also had three 80 cf tanks staged in the system, which
contained plenty of air to get back to the entrance.
Lamar Hines, Incident Report, "Fatality at Devil's Ear." 18
March 2008
Luther Monroe, CDNN - www..cdnn.info, "Rebreather accident
kills Swiss diver at Ginnie Springs." 11 March 2008
Lise Fisher, www.gainsville.com, "Swiss man dies while cave-
diving." 12 March 2008
Comments: There are additional questions as to what caused the
fatality. Mark, though experienced, may have pushed the
envelope too far.


********** 9 June
Jackson Blue Springs, Florida
fatality, medical issue, drowning
Joel Mitchell Tubbs (41) and his partner registered with the
sheriff's office for the night dive. They entered the water,
signaled that they were "okay," and began their dive. After a
short distance, the lead diver turned to check her partner, and
found Joel's underwater scooter sinking to the bottom and that
Joel had risen to the cave ceiling. When she reached him, he
was unresponsive, so she immediately pulled him to the surface.
CPR was attempted but was unsuccessful.
unattributed, Dothan Eagle, AL, "Alabama cave diver dies at
Blue Spring near Marianna." 18 June 2008
unattributed, WTVYNews4.com, "Cave Diver Dies at Blue
Springs." 9 June 2008

---------- Page 33 ----------
2008 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
Comments: This is assumed to be a medical issue that led to the
drowning.
Late July
Sistema Naharon, Quintana Roo, Mexico
multiple issues, no injury, no aid
Hans and Patrick went to retrieve in-cave equipment after
teaching a full cave-diving class. Their plan was to traverse
from Cenote Cristal (Cenote Naharon) down the Death Arrow
jump, pick up the spool, and swim back. As they were heading
towards the Mayan Blue, Hans went to "drop" a "cookie" and
dropped his safety spool. As he reached for his safety, he lost
buoyancy and started to descend. He then reached for the
inflator, but was unable to avoid crashing into the floor. They
reached the spool and retrieved it 80 minutes into the dive.
Twenty minutes into the return trip, Hans saw a flash of light
from Patrick, 15 meters away. As he approached, he saw Patrick
struggling to access a bailout regulator, the exhale breathing
hose of which had become detached from the rebreather canister.
At Patrick's request, Hans reattached the hose. This was a
catastrophic loop failure and they still had a 60-minute, upstream
swim to exit the cave.
Patrick cleaned up his hose routing and attempted to put itback
on the loop. He found out quickly that it was not going to work.
Hans offered some 32% EAN which was later accepted.
As they went to retrieve the cookie, Hans passed the tank to
Patrick, but when he reached for it, the mouth piece came off the
regulator. He caught it before it could fall far and replaced it.
Then, as Patrick was swimming off and Hans was working with
Patrick's "too short" side-mount bungies, Hans' rebreather
became caught in the ceiling. He jerked his head down and
suddenly realized his head was very heavy. A large rock had
came loose from the ceiling and was forcing him to the floor.
Hans was able to roll to the right before impact with the ground.
Hans, www.quietdiver.com, "8000 Feet, One Spool and One
Total Loop Failure." undated
Comments: Hans and Patrick had been cave diving in Mexico
for the previous seven months without incident. Then, all of this
happened on one trip. They held a thorough evaluation after the
dive and made both equipment and planning adjustments.


********** 19 September
Jackson Blue Springs, Florida
fatality, drowning
Richard Mork (39) and Dan Weyant began the dive in Jackson
Blue Springs at 1:04 PM. The plan was to scooter to about 3300
feet, and leave a safety bottle. They would then swim to 3900
feet, jump over to DeLoches Delight, and complete the circuit or
until either had used one-third of their air. Richard's scooter had
mechanical issues just 100 feet into the dive, so they decided to
swim. Sixty minutes into the dive and about 2000 feet, in an
area called the Rabbit Hole, Dan noticed Richard was acting
"erratic." Richard bolted past Dan towards the entrance.
In a few seconds, Richard stopped swimming about 5 feet from
the third "T". When Dan got to Richard, his regulator was out of
his mouth and Richard was jerking and his loop was floating
above his head. Dan used a secondary regulator and tried to
force air into Richard's lungs to resuscitate Richard for 15
minutes, but was unsuccessful.
Dan's gas reserve was becoming critical so he swam out and
notified authorities. During the exit, Dan had to stop himself
and get his breathing under control, as he was using well over
200 feet per minute. Edd Sorenson, a Florida safety director for
the International Underwater Cave Rescue and Recovery, went
in to recover his friend's body.
Dan Weyant, Incident Report, untitled, September 2008
Kate McCardell, Jackson County Floridian, "Cave diver dies at
Jackon Blue." 20 September 2008
Anthony Anamelechi, Tallahassee Democrat, "Texas man dies
while cave diving at Blue Springs Park." 23 September 2008
Comments: Forrest Wilson: The current thought on this incident
is that Richard's sensors were too old at 18 months, when 12 is
the maximum.


********** 12 November
Wayne's World (School Sink), Florida
two fatalities, drowning
Joe Christian Hartranft (52) and Yessic Cozay Spencer (42)
began their dive heading towards the Short Cut Tunnel. It is
believed that Yessic, who was leading, determined he had a gas
problem either in, or after the Short Cut Tunnel beyond. The
Short Cut Tunnel is only about 3 feet high and has both fresh
water and saltwater, which causes visibility problems. It is also
possible to lose the line, and this seems to be what happened as
Joe headed for the Staircase Tunnel. It appears that Yessic was
having trouble breathing. He deployed his own reel to go find
Joe, but quickly realized he was low on air, clipped back in his
partially deployed reel, and bolted for the entrance. In his haste,
Yessic used the main gold line to "climb" out of the main cave
towards the entrance. Yessic may also have had a buoyancy
problem. A body-sized impact crater was found at the lowest
point of Dog Tunnel, suggesting a massive silt cloud may have
been created.
Joe deployed a spool and found a route from the Staircase
Tunnel back to the gold line in a self-rescue effort. During the
effort, he must have dropped his spool and could not find it due
to silt. He deployed his second spool, which had only inches of
the line left. Joe's breathing rate was probably high allowing
less time to get out of the cave. Here he found several line traps
where the line falls into an area too small for a diver to follow.
This may have been caused by Yessic's "climb" out. Also, there
were probably visibility issues with the silting. Once Joe's
second spool was used, he was out of options. It appears Joe
was "OK'ing the line when he died.
Paul Heinerth and Brett Hemphill were the recovery divers.
When they entered the cave they immediately saw Yessic's
body. It was in the main cavern, 47 feet deep, by his O2 bottle
since he could not use his remaining breathing air. The isolator
to his back-mounted, right-side back cylinder was closed. O2
toxicity can lead to blindness and may have been why Yessic
had tied himself into the line. They found one of Yessic's fins
20 feet beyond the body and the second fin 50 feet further at the

---------- Page 34 ----------
2008 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
lowest part of the Dog Tunnel. The three-way arrow rack into
the Dog Tunnel had been completely pulled away. Joe was
found 160 feet farther in. His body had floated to the ceiling of
the School Sink #2 dome.
Paul Heinerth, Brett Hemphill, recovery report, "Wayne's
World Recovery." 12 November 2008
Jodie Tillman, St. Petersburg Times, "Missing cave divers'
bodies found in sinkhole." 13 November 2008
Times Staff, TampaBay.com, "divers found dead in sinkhole
identified." 13 November 2008
Comments: Preliminary information showed that the two men
did not have the qualifications to dive in Wayne's World.
Yessic may have been extremely stressed. During the recovery,
Brett, found a 60-foot-long line trap section of the gold line.
The line had moved into an impassible bedding plane. Also,
without the silting problem, the recovery team found Joe's
partially used spool.


********** 15 November
Forty Fathom, Florida
fatality, drowning
Sean Patrick Spiegel (25), Matthew Berry (22), Doug Masters
(24), and Nicole Wilkerson (23) went out for dinner and
cocktails on Friday evening from 8 PM to 9 PM. About 1:30
AM Saturday morning they decided to do a night dive. A fifth
person remained on the surface for safety reasons. They
descended to 104 feet. The dive lasted about twenty minutes
and at which point they decided to ascend. Matthew signaled his
dive partners to go up but Sean signaled that he wanted to stay
down six more minutes. At 70 feet, Matthew could not see Sean
S, he and Doug went back down to 104 feet to look for him. In
the report, Matthew said sometimes Sean would let go of the
rope, but that never lasted more than five minutes. Without
finding Sean, the remaining three returned to the surface and
called authorities.
Recovery dive teams responded to the call and made multiple
dives searching for Sean over the next two days. Low visibility
hampered recovery efforts. Sean's body was recovered at 8:15
PM on Sunday, November 16th at a depth of 105 feet.
Austin L. Miller, Gainesville Sun, Gainesville.com, "Diver
reported missing at Forty Fathom Grotto." 15 November 2008
Austin L. Miller, Ocala.com, "Body of diver recovered in Forty
Fathom Grotto." 16 November 2008
Luther Monroe, CDNN, "Scuba Diver Drowned at Forty Fathom
Grotto." 17 November 2008
Comments: The question of having cocktails and then diving
only four hours later is of obvious concern. However, Sean's
dive instructor said he was an exceptional, safety oriented
student.

---------- Page 35 ----------
2007 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
2007 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 5 February
unnamed, flooded iron ore mine, Newfoundland
fatality,
Joseph Steffen (51) was part of a group of International cave
divers brought in by Ocean Quest Adventure Resort and the Bell
Island Heritage Society. Their purpose was to explore a
collection of flooded iron ore mines. The diving expedition was
organized to examine the integrity of the underwater mine
shafts, identify any hazards, and assess the possibility of
establishing an adventure tourism attraction. Steffen had
difficulties while exiting mine #2. Other members of the dive
team at the Bell Island site brought Steffen to the surface but
could not revive him. He died because of an air embolism,
although his depth was only to 50 feet. He was found on the
ceiling above the main dive line, about 300 feet from the
entrance.
Bern Szukalski, NSS News, "Underground Update." May 2007
unattributed, CBC News, "Diver Dies on Bell Island
Newfoundland." 5 February 2007
Dr. David Sawatzki, MD, untitled, 26 March 2007
Comments: The autopsy showed the arterial gas embolism. It
also showed another mass on his lung and in his liver of which
he probably did not know. The mass in his lung obstructed one
of the airways in his lung. During the re-ascent the obstruction
was bypassed and the lung ruptured.


********** 8 February
Hognose Cave, Utah
stranded, aid, no injury, not actually a cave
Two 16-year-old boys climbed up to the cave (actually an arch)
after school. The arch is north of Ogden. It is a steep, four-
point scramble to get up. Ropes are recommended to get down.
Their cell phones did not have service, but homeowners in the
area heard their calls for help. Rescue teams spent five hours
getting them back down.
unattributed, Salt Lake Tribune, "Teens rescued after five hours
trapped at mouth of cave." 9 February 2007
Dave Schultz, CaveChat, "Cave-related rescue in Utah", 14
February 2007
Comments: None.


********** 11 May
Longhorn Quarry, Texas
inadequate equipment, stranded
Around midnight, six youths decided to explore the quarry
complex with a single flashlight. They gained access by
squeezing under the metal door. Three of them, overcome by
sanity, quickly turned back. The remaining three, ages between
17 and 21, continued to explore and became lost. About 3:30
AM, one of those inside the quarry established a cell-phone
signal and called one of those that had left. The youth on the
outside decided to call authorities.
Rescue workers cut through the bars and tied together 250-foot
rescue ropes "to serve as a life line". They searched the quarry
for three hours before finding the missing three. They were
huddled together about 1000 feet from the entrance. After being
checked by EMS they were placed in handcuffs and charged
with trespassing.
Brian Chasnoff, San Antonio Express - News, "Youths' cave
exploration traps three; fire crews get them out." 12 May 2007
Brian Chasnoff, San Antonio Express - News, "Three youths
rescued from cave." 12 May 2007
Katy Camp, KOAI - News 4. "Teens Arrested After Quarry
Rescue." 12 May 2007
Comments: The list of poor decisions on this trip was extensive.
The cell phone access to the surface was an interesting turn that
helped considerably for the rescue efforts.


********** 11 June
unnamed sea cave near Owen Point, British
Columbia
trapped stranded, aid, no injury
Neil Peterson (63), Guy Peterson (22), Kelsey Peterson (20),
Tim Kniffin (28), and Joe Ellis (24) were backpacking along the
West Coast Trail with 50-pound backpacks on Vancouver
Island. They had taken off the backpacks to cross a 3-to-5-foot
wide surge channel when a 10-foot-high wave knocked four of
the five into the channel and pushed them 50 feet into the "five-
story" sea cave entrance. After bouncing off the increasingly
higher walls, they were able to climb out of the 40-degree water
onto driftwood. They scrambled up the driftwood to a perch
about 30 feet above the water.
Joe Ellis had been high enough to be missed by the wave. He
retrieved the remaining dry sleeping bags, food, and water, and
tossed the items down to the trapped four. They told him of
another entrance, but it was vertical. Ellis then headed for help.
He found a rope at an unoccupied ranger cabin. Joe also
encountered other hikers, and asked them to call for rescue.
At the sea cave, Joe tied loops in the rope and Guy and Kelsey
climbed out. When Kniffin attempted the climb he slipped 3
feet from the top, and fell into the water. A few minutes later,
shortly before 7 PM., a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter arrived from
Port Angeles. The other hikers had completed the call.
Rescue swimmer John Linnborn was lowered with ropes and
they were able to get Kniffin and the others to safety.
Brad Wong, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, "4 survive being swept
into cave by rogue wave." 15 June 2007
Comments: Joe Ellis was told the rescue team was prepared to
look for bodies in the water because it is so rare that people
survive.

---------- Page 36 ----------
2008 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
2008 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 28 January
unnamed cave, Chuckey, Tennessee
dog trapped, aid, no injury
Sailor, the coon dog (6) his master Travis Sturm, and a friend
went into the woods on a coon hunt. The dog picked up the trail
of a raccoon, followed it, and continued to follow the trail down
a small cave entrance. Travis started digging to help get Sailor
out of the 10-inch-high passage. Volunteers started showing up,
including cavers from the ETCCO and Mountain Empire Grotto,
to help during the next few days and the dig continued. Travis
estimated he had been 100 feet into the cave and he knew Sailor
was in there; when they would yell, they could hear Sailor bark
from farther in. The dig continued, including chiseling and
trying to open a second entrance.
On February 7th. Josh and Mark from ETTCO were able to
negotiate an 8-inch-squeeze, a couple of other tight spots, and
sharp turns, to a 25-foot pit where they found Sailor alive at the
bottom. Josh rappelled the pit, put Sailor into a duffel bag, and
ascended up the pit with the dog in the bag. Josh passed Sailor
to Mark, who was able to help Sailor through the tight spots and
to the entrance. Sailor was pulled up and handed to his owner.
Sailor had been in the cave 11 days.
Stoney Sharp, WBIR.com-Knoxville, TN, "Coon dog stuck in
Green County cave." 7 February 2008
Comments: Excellent work, cavers.


********** 28 March
unnamed cave, Vera Cruz, Mexico
fall, fatality
Between 10 and 11 AM, an unnamed farmer was removing
weeds from his land and marking the border when through
carelessness, he fell into a pit where no one could help him.
Residents nearby saw the fall and called authorities. Zongolica
Proteccion Civil Espeleo notified Rescate Mexico (ERM) who
arrived with seven members and were led to the pit. They rigged
two ropes, did a dual rappel, noting unstable walls on the
descent. A ledge was reached at -20 meters, a third member
came down, and the second 10-meter-high pitch was rigged.
The lifeless body was found at the bottom of this pitch. The
body was packaged and rigging set for a haul from the surface to
avoid rock-fall and to utilize the people on top.
Octavio Cruz Luna (in Spanish), translated by Mark Minton,
Espeleo Rescate Mexico, "rescate en San Andres temascalapa,
Ver/Marzo 2008." March 2008
Comments: A sad mistake made by someone just clearing his
land. Please be careful around pits.


********** 31 March
No Name Tunnel, Glenwood Springs, Colorado
fatality, unknown
Gary Petkus (57) was discovered dead in the small cave by three
hikers-climbers in late March. It appears that Gary had been
living in the cave near Cave of the Clouds for some time and that
he had been dead for several weeks. Parts of the body had begun
to mummify. Several homeless people live in the caves near
Cave of the Clouds. There was no evidence of foul play and the
cause of death has not been determined.
Dennis Webb, Daily Sentinel.com, "Man found dead in cave." 1
April 2008
Bill Scanlon, Rocky Mountain News, "hikers discover body
inside cave. Man found near Glenwood Springs partly
mummified." 2 April 2008
Phillip Yates, Glenwood Springs Post Independent, "Glenwood
Springs authorities release dead man's name." 30 May 2008
Comments: Gary had been homeless in the Glenwood Springs
area for the last 20 to 30 years.


********** 7 April
unnamed cave, El Paso, Texas
car accident, injury, aid
Reyes Jaramillo Hernandez (67) was on the Transmountain
Road near El Paso when his car caught on fire. Reyes' brother
found the burned-out car but could not find his brother, and
called police. Police began a search and found Reyes about 100
feet from the vehicle, down a cliff, and in a cave. Reyes had
third degree burns on his hands and legs, and was taken to the
University Medical Burn center in Lubbock, Texas in critical
condition.
Investigators were unsure how the car caught on fire, if Reyes
was alone, and how he got to the cave.
unattributed, KVIA.com-El Paso, Las Cruses, "UPDATE:
Burned man rescued from cave identified." 13 April 2008
Comments: The cave is probably a rock shelter.


********** 2 August
Wayne's World (School Sink), Florida
fatality, drowning
Linda Finer (45) and Sharon Allred (46) were looking for a place
to hang out. They drove their golf cart around the locked gate
and past a no trespassing sign. Both had been drinking. About
100 feet farther they reached Wayne's World, where Linda
announced that she wanted to go swimming and jumped in.
When she did not come back up, Sharon ran to get two friends to
help. When they returned, Linda's body was floating along the
east side of the sinkhole. They called 911 and tried CPR, but
Linda could not be resuscitated.
Normaan Merchant, St. Petersburg Times, "Dip in Pasco
sinkhole ends in drowning." 5 August 2008
Comments: None.

---------- Page 37 ----------


********** 12 November
unnamed cave, near Carlsbad New Mexico
cave collapse, injury, aid
For Burnell Booker (41), it started as a normal work day doing
road construction with his front-end loader on U.S. 62-180 west
of Carlsbad. He was in his loader at a gravel pit about one mile
from the highway when it became stuck. He called the office
give his location and have them send some equipment to free the
loader. Then, Burnell tried one more time to free the loader, but
he had no way of knowing that his loader was stuck directly
above an unknown cave. Burnell's last attempt to free the front
end loader caused the ceiling of the cave's dome to collapse,
taking Burnell and the loader with it.
The pit is 40 feet deep and in the shape of a bell with a floor up
to 50 feet wide at the bottom. The loader wedged between the
walls and stopped a few feet above the floor. Amazingly,
Burnell was bruised and shaken but otherwise uninjured, and
was able to climb down from the loader to the floor. He waited
there with no way out.
The "rescue" construction workers arrived to where Burnell had
telephoned being stuck. They found no loader, but they did find
a 20-foot-wide hole and Burnell at the bottom. After being
rescued, Burnell spent the night in the hospital for observation
and then released. The construction company, the highway
department, and BLM then started working on the problem of
extracting the loader from the pit.
Stella Davis, Carlsbad Current-Argus, "Worker tells of plunge
into sink hole." 13 November 2008
Stella Davis, Carlsbad Current-Argus, "Several issues of concern
follow initial incident." 13 November 2008


********** George Veni, email: Re: New cave, 14 November 2008
Dave Belski, personnal comm. November 2008
Comments: Per George Veni, the pit was to be determined to be
40 feet deep (using a disto), versus the reported 80 feet. The pit
is a suffosion feature and completely formed in alluvium.
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at
www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431

---------- Page 38 ----------
The National Cave Rescue Commission
The National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) is a volunteer
group developed to train cave rescue personnel throughout the
United States. It is part of the National Speleological Society,
located within the Department of the Administrative Vice-
President.
The NCRC does not perform cave rescues. It organizes,
develops, and provides training in cave rescue techniques,
maintains lists of individuals trained in cave rescue, and can help
locate rescue resources in times of need. Most NCRC-trained
cavers do participate in rescues, but not as part of the NCRC.
They work as members of their local rescue teams, civil defense
units, or cave rescue groups.
The NCRC also works to:
Maintain good working relationships with other rescue-
oriented individuals, organizations, government agencies,
and sources of specialized equipment and services (for
example, the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center and the
Center for Mine Safety and Health Administration).
Maintain current files of potentially useful equipment (for
example, underground communications equipment and
cave-oriented medical kits) and services that can be
obtained through the above sources.
Acquire and maintain a limited supply of certain equipment,
such as special rescue litters and vertical rescue gear, in key
locations throughout the country.
Increase the number and proficiency of cave rescuers across
the United States by sponsoring training sessions and
seminars, and by encouraging other caving, rescue, and
EMS organizations to sponsor such educational programs.
Encourage international cooperation by developing contacts
with cave rescuers and rescue agencies in other countries,
by pre-planning with these groups where US involvement is
anticipated, and by inviting participation of cave rescuers
from other countries in NCRC seminars.
Organization
The NCRC is led by a Board of Regional Coordinators which
includes a National Coordinator, Training Coordinator, Medical
Coordinator, and Diving Coordinator (each of whom coordinates
resources and activities at a national level), and Regional
Coordinators for each of ten regions in the United States and its
territories. Board members are nominated by cavers and cave
rescue personnel, and are appointed by the NSS Board of
Governors. The NCRC depends on many volunteers without
official positions whose special knowledge, talents, or contacts
make the network more effective.
Training
The NCRC sponsors a week-long Cave Rescue Operations and
Management Seminar each year that is held in various locations
around the United States. The seminar serves as a "boot camp"
of cave rescue and provides three levels of training. Cave rescue
is constantly evolving, and the most up-to-date techniques are
presented each year. In addition to the annual national week-
long seminar, the NCRC regions sponsor regional week-long
seminars, regional modular seminars (taught over a series of
weekends), courses in small-group and self-rescue techniques,
and weekend cave rescue orientation courses.
NCRC seminars consist of extensive classroom and field work
designed to maximize the learning experience. The seminars
include lectures, demonstrations. and field exercises on
underground environments, vertical rescue, mechanical
advantage systems, extrication techniques, basic medical
principles, communications, and the management of cave rescue
operations. Emphasis is placed on practical skills and
techniques, with realistic exercises in a variety of cave
environments.
The seminars provide basic and advanced material for students
who typically include cavers, emergency services personnel, and
emergency managers. During the eight days of a seminar,
students receive about 100 hours of instruction, and are on the
move from early morning well into the evening. The NCRC uses
and teaches the Incident Command System (ICS) used by fire
departments, rescue squads, and other emergency agencies and
services.
Course Listings and Contact Information
Information on NCRC operation, activities, and training,
including contact information for NCRC Coordinators, is
published each year in the NSS Members Manual, and is also
available on the NCRC website at www.ncrc.info. Upcoming
seminars are announced on the web site and in the NSS News.
National Cave Rescue Commission Course
Listing and Contact Information:
www.caves.org/io/ncro
