
---------- Page 1 ----------
NSS March
NEWS
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS 2006
2008, Part 2

---------- Page 2 ----------
American Caving Accidents
Editor
American Caving Accidents
Ray Keeler
1051 Solar Road NW
March 2008
Albuquerque, NM. 87107
Features
aca@caves.org
ACA 2006
An Overview of the 2006 Incidents
Review Committee
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics, 1986 - 2006
George Dasher
John Gookin
2006 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Kris Green
Mark Minton
2006 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Bill Putnam
2006 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Bob Rodgers
Forrest Wilson
The National Cave Rescue Commission
Deadline: The NSS News is distributed the
last week of the month preceding the date
Contributing Authors and Photographers
of publication. Ads, articles, and announce-
ments should be sent to the NSS News,
Jansen Cardy
Box 879, Angels Camp, CA 95222 by the
633 Cromwell Avenue
15th of the month, six weeks before the
Rocky Hill, CT 06067
month of issue (e.g., material for March
should be submitted by January 15).
The NSS News (ISSN-0027-7010) is
published monthly, with the Members
Manual and American Caving Accidents
published as additional issues by the
National Speleological Society Inc., 2813
Cave Ave., Huntsville AL, 35810-4431.
Periodicals Postage Paid at Huntsville, AL
and additional mailing offices.
Tel: (256) 852-1300
Fax: (256) 851-9241
Email: nss@caves.org
www.caves.org
Regular membership in the NSS is $36 per
year. Subscriptions to the NSS News are
$23 per year; individual copies are $1.50
each. Copies of American Caving
Accidents are also available from the NSS
Bookstore for $5.00 plus postage. Contact
the Huntsville office for membership
applications, subscriptions, orders, or for
replacement of issues missing or damaged
in the mail.
Copyright © 2008
Front Cover
by the National Speleological
NCRC students practice transporting a patient during the 2007 NCRC
Society Inc.
week long practice. Photograph Copyright © 2007 Jansen Cardy.
All rights reserved. No portion of
Back Cover
this publication may be reproduced
without the written permission of
Top: Students carrying a SKED litter during a mock rescue exercise at
the National Speleological Society.
the 2007 NCRC National Seminar. Photograph Copyright © 2007 Jansen
Postmaster:
Cardy.
Send address changes to
Lower: The slow negotiating of the litter in tight, narrow passage during
National Speleological Society
the 2007 NCRC National Seminar. Photograph Copyright © 2007 Jansen
2813 Cave Ave.
Cardy.
Huntsville AL 35810-4431
Volume 66, Number 3, Part 2
SPELEOLOGICAL
SWS

---------- Page 3 ----------
An Overview of the 2006 Incidents
American Caving Accidents (ACA) is the journal of record for
caving accidents and safety incidents in the United States and
North America. This issue contains reports for incidents that
occurred in 2006. Following the custom of previous issues, the
reports have been separated into two general categories: regular
caving and cave diving, and then further classified by result or
outcome and by causes and contributing factors. The cave diving
incidents are grouped separately, and an overview is presented at
the end of this section.
Since 1994, we have used the category "difficulty on rope" to
encompass such problems as becoming stuck at the lip of a pit,
clothing or hair caught in the rappel device, jammed rappel
safety, or simply becoming unable to ascend or descend. Our
intent is to better describe these situations, which might
otherwise be lumped under "stuck", "trapped and/or stranded",
or perhaps "equipment problem".
In reporting the number of incidents versus NSS membership
totals, only caving incidents involving fatalities, injury, or aid
were included. The reader should also be aware that the
members of the National Speleological Society constitute only a
portion of the population of active cavers. Further, not all
incidents are reported to ACA. Therefore these numbers should
not be considered reliable indicators of accident rates for caving
or used to draw conclusions about the relative degree of risk or
danger involved in caving.
Incident Results
Fatalities
On average there are three or four fatal caving accidents in North
America each year. When incidents involving untrained and
inadequately equipped spelunkers are excluded, the average
drops to one or two fatal accidents per year.
There were four reported fatalities in 2006, all in November and
December. The first was in Rio Camoy, Puerto Rico where a
highly trained NCRC instructor was leading a tourist group. In
high water and on a tether, he slipped over a waterfall and drown
while being suspended by the rope. In Sloans Valley Cave a
group went caving as part of an annual event but with no
In the US, "cavers" generally consider "spelunkers" to be
people who have no real knowledge or understanding of caves
and caving safety, but who decide to enter a cave anyway,
usually without proper equipment.
helmets. During an exposed exit climb that some refused to try,
one member fell. The third was during a large training session at
Hoya de Guaguas, San Luis Potosí, Mexico, where a senior
instructor became detached from the rope during the entrance
rappel. The last fatality resulted when a local artifact gatherer
found a new cave to him and decided to hand-over-hand down
the entrance pit while leaving his flashlight on the surface.
Additionally there were three fatalities in the caving-related
incidents area. Ski patrollers at a California ski run were
adjusting a protective fence around a known gas vent when the
snow collapsed and two fell in. A third went down to help and
was overcome by fumes.
In addition to the incidents just described, there was a fatal cave
diving accident that is described below.
Injury and Aid
Incidents in this category resulted in injury to one or more
people, who then required help to exit the cave. While many of
these incidents involved rescue call-outs and outside assistance,
others were resolved by the cavers themselves without calling
for rescue.
Once again caver falls (13) were the leading cause of injury and
NSS Membership and
Number of Incidents
Year
Members
Incidents
Only incidents resulting in aid, injury, or fatality are
included. Membership figures include all classes of
membership.

---------- Page 4 ----------
rescue. Two resulted in death, two becoming stuck, and the
others required rescue efforts. Included in these are cavers hand-
over-handing up or down ropes and falls from where a belay
would have avoided the incident. Some of the exposures were
significant.
With the thousands of trips each year and the wet and sometimes
slippery conditions, it is inevitable that slips and falls will
happen. Six trips are in this category, including Wind Cave,
Hurricane Cave, Raccoon Mountain Caverns, Rockhouse Cave,
Dam #4 Cave, and Fitton Cave.
However, some of the falls in 2006 were due to very poor
decisions. A spelunker slipped while hand-over-handing up a
rope in Turtle Graveyard Cave and fell. The other hand-over-
hand incident was a fatality.
In Crooked Creek Ice Cave, rock fall caused a serious injury that
was quickly addressed and efficiently executed by the highly
trained members of the caving party and rescue personnel. Also
a rock fell in Church Mountain Cave causing a caver to break a
leg. The cause of the rock fall is not known.
The other injury and aid incidents include coming off rope
(Indecision Cave), hypothermia in (Sloans Valley Cave), and
being stuck on rope causing harness suspension trauma and
hypothermia (Viking Cave).
Aid, No Injury
Most incidents in this category are rescues of individuals that
cavers often refer to as "spelunkers" who are typically poorly
equipped and inexperienced, and are often stranded when they
break or lose their flashlights, run out of batteries, descend pits
hand-over-hand, or get lost. Sometimes, however, even
experienced and properly equipped cavers fall ill and need
assistance, or are trapped by rock fall or flooded passage.
There are eleven incidents in this category. Six trips either ran
out of light (Lost Creek Cave), became lost (Snail Shell Cave,
Fitton Cave, Peppersauce Cave) or were just "very over due"
(Pettijohns Cave). A caver in Airman's Cave just could not get
out until the rescue provided incentive.
Two rescues were due to cavers having trouble on rope and
needing outside assistance. A hard-to-negotiate lip and
exhaustion stopped one caver in Bear Hollow Rift. Another
caver at South Pittsburg Pit became inverted on rope and needed
to be hauled out.
Two short falls resulted in the person becoming stuck and
needing to be extracted (Glade Cave and Clay Cave).
In Sharps Cave two people were too tired and big to get back up
the entrance climb by themselves.
Injury, No Aid
These incidents resulted in injuries ranging from scrapes and
bruises to sprained ankles and broken legs. In each case, the
victim was able to exit the cave with minimal assistance from
members of the caving party. Four incidents are in this group.
One fall (Wind Cave) was a true accident as previous members
of the same party had used the rock as a handhold before it broke
for the unlucky person.
In Bigfoot Cave, a multi-ton rock on a main trail rolled with a
caver below. Despite breaking his leg and being pinned, the
caver was able to be freed, exit the cave, and complete the multi-
mile hike to the vehicles. In Hawaii, a caver near a known
entrance, stepped in the tall grass, broke a ledge, and discovered
another entrance in the fall. In Fitton Cave, a caver broke an
ankle upon landing from a short, four-foot jump down.
No Consequence
These incidents are typically of the "near miss" category. They
are included so that the reader will be aware of the many things
that can go wrong on a caving trip. Examples include
carabineers or maillon links coming unscrewed while on rope,
rock fall incidents and passage collapses not resulting in injury
or requiring aid, and individuals or groups who become lost or
stranded, but who are eventually able to find their way out or
resolve their difficulties without assistance.
There were no such reports in 2006.
Incident Types
Acetelyne-related
No burns, explosions, or other acetylene-related incidents were
reported for 2006. It may be that the wide availability of
affordable, high-quality electric headlamps has largely displaced
carbide lights in US caving.
Bad Air
None of the caving accidents and incidents reported in this issue
involved bad air. One caving-related incident involving
asphyxiation occurred in April 2006 when three ski patrollers
fell into a gas vent. At least one was overcome by bad air, but
falls contributed to the deaths of the other two.
To learn more about the dangers and signs of bad air in caves,
see Bill Mixon's article in the April 2000 ACA, and Bill Elliott's
article in the December, 1997, ACA.
Caver Fall
Falls remain the leading type of safety incident or accident in
caving, accounting for a large proportion of reported injuries and
rescues. Fifteen out of 31 reported incidents for 2006 involved
falls. Many of the incidents could have been prevented by the
use of a belay. Cavers should consider using a belay whenever
the exposure of a climb or traverse is greater than a body length,
and a belay should always be used when climbing or descending
a cable ladder.
Cavers also fall on occasion while moving through "horizontal"
passages, accounting for a number of accidents reported in this
issue. Cavers can reduce the risk of falls by wearing sturdy boots
with lug soles and maintaining "three points of contact" while
moving through uneven terrain.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder
This category includes cavers who become stranded on rope and
require assistance, or who experience significant difficulties and
require assistance to complete their ascent or descent. The South
Pittsburg Pit and Viking Cave incidents are included here.
Cavers involved in these incidents are often relatively
inexperienced and sometimes unfamiliar with their gear. Others
may be experienced cavers who are simply out of practice or out
of shape. Some incidents occur when cavers are unable to deal
with situations such as crossing the lip of a pit with weight on
the rope below, crossing an undercut or overhanging lip,
changing from rappel to ascent and vice versa, or climbing a
cable ladder.

---------- Page 5 ----------
Competent cavers must master their systems and know how their
equipment works. With practice, skilled cavers can perform a
change-over in less than 60 seconds. Spend some time
practicing; it could save your life.
Drowning
Drowning incidents are infrequent in "dry caving," but have
occurred when cavers became trapped by flooding or when they
attempted to free-dive through sumped passages. One caver
died while crossing an underground river in Rio Camoy and
drown, suspended by a belay line, after being washed over a
waterfall.
Equipment Problem
This catch-all category includes rigging failures, slipping
ascenders, light failure, rope failure, and misuse or lack of
equipment. There were no reported incidents of this type for
2006.
Exhaustion
Exhaustion is a contributing factor in a wide variety of incidents
in 2006. Cavers became exhausted while climbing on rope,
trying to correct problems on rope, and on long trips.
Exhaustion effects the decision-making process and often leads
to incidents that are reported in other categories. The Bear
Hollow Rift incident was a combination of exhaustion, improper
equipment, and poor physical fitness. Exhaustion also led to the
Sloans Valley water incident.
Flooding
The lesson taught by flood entrapments is simple: pay attention
to the weather conditions. Check the forecast for the caving area,
and be alert for the possibility of flooding. If the cave is known
to flood and you do not have a clear forecast, go somewhere
else. It is just not worth the risk of entrapment, rescue, media
attention, closed caves, injury, or death. For more on the dangers
of water caves, see George Dasher's editorial in the June 2003
ACA.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is usually a secondary result in the reported
incidents, occurring subsequent to cavers becoming injured,
stranded, or trapped in a cave. There were several incidents in
2006 involving lost or stranded cavers in which some of those
rescued required treatment for hypothermia. Remember:
hypothermia can kill you all by itself, but it also impairs your
thinking and judgment, making potentially deadly mistakes more
likely.
Hypothermia was a complicating factor in several reported
incidents involving cavers stuck in crevices or trapped by rock
fall or negotiating water. Cavers on rope, traversing long
stretches of water, and being stuck are included in this category
in 2006
Illness
There were no reported incidents of histoplasmosis infections
due to caving in 2006. There were also no reported incidents
where illness was a contributing factor to another kind of
incident.
Lost
Most of these incidents involve untrained and ill-equipped
cavers, spelunkers, or novices with little experience. Many
escalate to the "stranded" category when the batteries run out or
flashlights get broken. When found, lost cavers often require
treatment for hypothermia, sometimes including hospitalization.
The two spelunkers in Snail Shell Cave fit this description.
However in Fitton Cave the cavers became lost after they
became separated from the main group.
Rock fall
Rock fall incidents accounted for several serious accidents and
incidents during the reporting period, resulting in injuries and
rescues as well as one case of entrapment. The most notable rock
fall incidents were those in which cavers were pinned or trapped
in caves.
The rock fall accident in Crooked Creek Ice Cave in September
caused a serious injury that was quickly reacted to by the other
members of the team.
The Wind Cave incident is included in both the caver fall and
rock fall categories since the handhold that broke was the rock
that knocked the caver unconscious. The caver was able to
complete the trip after resting and recovering. The rock fall in
Bighorn Cave could have been much worse.
Stuck
Getting stuck is usually not much of a problem for experienced
cavers. Most of us have been stuck in a tight passage at some
point, and have learned that a calm head and careful movement
can usually remedy the situation. Sometimes, however,
extracting a stuck caver from a tight passage or crevice can be
extremely difficult. In 2006, however, all three incidents of
getting stuck involved short falls into tight passages where help
was needed to remove the person.
Trapped/Stranded
This category is used to describe incidents in which the caver or
cavers were prevented from exiting the cave by rock fall, light
failure, lack of equipment, equipment failure, or other causes. In
many of the reported incidents, "spelunkers" became stranded
due to inexperience, inadequate equipment and/or poor
judgment. The two cavers in Sharps Cave became stranded
when they could not climb out of the entrance. The spelunkers
in Lost Creek Cave ran out of light.
An incident occurred when two people hand-over-handed down
a rope into a 30-foot pit in Alabama and were unable to get back
up. This would be under "caving-related" in an Alabama state
publication because the "cave" does not meet the 50-foot
Alabama minimum.
Other
This catch-all category includes sinkhole collapse, cuts by sharp
rocks, dislocated shoulders, twisted ankles and other joint
injuries, animal attacks, and other incidents not covered above,
including drug labs, explosives, or bodies found in caves. The
Elkhorn Mountain Cave incident is catagorised here.

---------- Page 6 ----------
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics
1986-2006
Result of Incident
Result
Fatality
86 87 88899091 9293 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06
Injury and Aid
)
0365512144425 26304
16 17 22 19 17 16 22
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
21 23 20 28 33 26 17 16 13 12 18 15 13 8 14 12 8 1
No Consequence
10 14 10 12 10 41181042835660 10
Total
16 20 11483124510
64 64 61 72 64 66 76 67 77 56 54 47 40 47 41 36 35 40 23 26 32
Incidents
Injury, or Aid
Involving Fatality, 45 48 49 51 55 54 60 64 57 44 43 43 32 44 40 34 31 35 23 26 32 32
Incident Type
Type
Caver Fall
Trapped/Stranded
22 22 22 19 20 15 21 27 15 20 17 13 20 06
Difficulty on Rope
- 13 18 18 13 9 17 14 9 10 15 6 5
-
Rockfall
-1465143155122
Lost
Flooding
Hypothermia
Illness
Exhaustion
Drowning
Stuck
P001000
Bad Air
Acetylene-related
Equipment
Other
Caving-related
Incidents
21020115 2 11 2 9 4 19 9 8
Cave Diving Incidents
Result
Fatality
86 87 88899091 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 0
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Consequence
Total Diving
Incidents

---------- Page 7 ----------
2006 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
32 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 6
Wind Cave
North Carolina
January 24
Lost Creek Cave
Georgia
February 8
Hurricane Cave
Georgia
February 8
Mana Nui Cave
Hawaii
March 4
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
March 5
Raccoon Mountain Caverns
Tennessee
March 16
Indecision Cave
Arizona
April 16
Elkhorn Mountain Cave
West Virginia
April 18
Rockhouse Cave
Missouri
May 7
Tongue River Cave
Wyoming
May 14
unnamed cave on Green Mountain
Alabama
May 27
Sloans Valley Cave
Kentucky
June 13
Snail Shell Cave
Tennessee
July 2
Airmans Cave
Texas
July 9
Dam #4 Cave
Maryland
August 4
Glade Cave
Virginia
August 5
Church Mountain Cave
Virginia
August 12
Fitton Cave
Arkansas
August 17
Peppersauce Cave
Arizona
August 19
Bigfoot Cave
California
September 4
Langdons Cave
Indiana
September 16
Crooked Creek Ice Cave
Kentucky
September 18
Fitton Cave
Arkansas
November 19
Rio Camoy, Cueva Resurgencia
Puerto Rico
November 23
Clay Cave
West Virginia
November 25
Bear Hollow Rift
Alabama
November 25
Sloans Valley Cave
Kentucky
December 2
Viking Cave
Alabama
December 2
Pettijohns Cave
Georgia
December 7
South Pittsburg Pit
Tennessee
December 9
Hoya de las Guaguas
SLP, Mexico
December 10
Turtle Graveyard Cave
Tennessee
December 29
Antonia Pit
Missouri
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
caver fall, knocked unconscious
aid, no injury
stranded, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall, hypothermia
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded, exhaustion, inadequate
equipment
injury and aid
caver fall, dislocated ankle
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
other
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded in pit, descended hand-over-
hand
injury and aid
stranded, hypothermia
aid, no injury
lost, stranded
aid, no injury
stranded
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stuck, exhaustion
injury and aid
rock fall, broken leg
aid, no injury
lost
aid, no injury
lost
injury, no aid
rock fall, passage collapse, broken leg
injury and aid
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
rock fall
injury and aid
caver fall, broken ankle
fatality
drowning
aid, no injury
stuck
aid, no injury
stranded in pit, exhaustion
fatality
caver fall, climbing without belay, no
helmet
injury and aid
stranded on rope, exhaustion,
suspension trauma
aid, no injury
exceeded return time
aid, no injury
stranded on rope, exhaustion
fatality
caver fall, lost attachment to rappel
device during descent
injury and aid
caver fall, climbing hand-over-hand,
inadequate equipment
fatality
caver fall, climbing hand-over-hand,
inadequate equipment

---------- Page 8 ----------
2006 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
2 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
June 14
Blue Springs
Florida
July 15
unnamed cave, Chassahowitzka
Florida
River
2006 Reported Caving Related Incidents
7 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
March 4
sea cave at Sunset Cliffs
California
April 6
Volcanic vent near Mammoth
California
Lakes
April 8
Rt 276 Quarry, Cliff Face
North Carolina
April 21
unnamed cave
Tobago
July 14
Two Door Cave
Hawaii
August 12
Rustyfeets Cave
Georgia
August 30
unspecified cave near Radcliff
Kentucky
Acknowledgments
As always, we are all indebted to the people who have contributed reports for this issue. Their willingness to share their experiences
makes ACA a valuable resource for all cavers. Several notable correspondents have contributed a substantial portion of the material for
these reports. They include: John LaMar Cole, George Dasher, Cindy Heazlit, Buddy Lane, Mark Minton, Bill Putnam, and Pat Seiser.
Many valuable comments, corrections, and suggestions were provided by reviewers George Dasher, John Gookin, Kris Green, Bob
Rodgers, and Forrest Wilson. Additional proofreading assistance was provided by George Dasher and Kris Green.
Acronyms and Explanations
2 meter SAR radio
Search and Rescue radios in the 155 megahertz to 170 megahertz range
CPR
Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation
Ferno Litter
Hard plastic rescue stretcher used to transport patients over rough terrain
Junkin Litter
A rescue stretcher used to transport patients over rough terrain
KED
Spine-immobilization device wrapped around the the patient torso and back of head
MA
Mechanical Advantage. Used in rope, technical hauling systems
Puka
Ceiling collapse in a lava tube forming an entrance
SAR
Search and Rescue
SKED
Plastic rescue stretcher wrapped around the patient used to transport over rough terrain
Stokes Litter
Aluminum or hard plastic rescue stretcher used to transport patients over rough terrain
Z-rig
A rescue haul technique that allows rescuers to raise or belay a patient
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
free-diving in cave entrance, breathed
from air pocket, lost consciousness
fatality
inadequate equipment, free-diving in
cave
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
surfer washed into sea cave, stranded
multiple fatalities
asphyxiation, fell into volcanic vent
containing bad air
aid, no injury
stranded on rope
fatality
cause unknown
aid, no injury
kayakers stranded in sea cave
aid, no injury
dog rescued from pit
aid, no injury
horse rescued from pit

---------- Page 9 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 6 January
Wind Cave, North Carolina
caver fall, injury, no aid
On January 6th, at 10 AM, Jonathan Mays (31) Scott Bosworth,
Cato and Chris Holler, and Chris McGrath entered Wind Cave to
inventory wintering bats for the North Carolina Wildlife
Resources Commission. The cave is located high on a ridge
requiring a steep one-quarter-mile climb through a boulder field.
Beyond the entrance is an 18-foot-long belly crawl with a
sinuous turn just before a tight squeeze into the first room,
Pipistrelle Hall. This is followed by a 12-foot climb to
Kentucky Canyon. Upon returning, Jonathan (who was second
to last) was told of an easier way to get down. He was directed
to ledge near the ceiling that the cavers had used as a hand hold
to lower their bodies down for a flat, soft landing. The ledge felt
solid and since three cavers heavier than Jonathan had just used
it, he started to do the same. As he started to lower himself
down, the ledge broke with a loud pop, causing his legs to go
horizontal with a four foot section of ledge falling over him
weighing about 70 pounds.
The fall was about eight feet and Jonathan was able to shove the
rock away from his face about two feet above the floor. He
landed on his tail bone and left side, and the rock slammed into
his right knee. The others raced over to help. Jonathan wanted
to get out of the fall zone, but the others wanted him to stay still.
Jonathan tried walking unaided for a few steps, felt faint but
could not vocalize it, and sat back down against the wall. He
was unconscious for about 20 seconds while his hisses, gurgles
and mutterings became intelligible. His left elbow and right
knee were bruised, he had the wind knocked out of him, and he
had blurry vision. His blank stare soon focused into recognition
and his short term memory returned. The team moved him out
of the rock fall zone once it was determined that nothing was
broken, and the fifth team member was allowed to down climb
the old way to assist. After a short recovery period, Jonathan
received water and some summer sausage which caused an
immediate energy return.
Jonathan was able to convince the team that he was all right and
they could continue the bat survey, but said if he felt the least bit
weak or hurt they would abort. As the day progressed, Jonathan
felt much better and they completed the Wind Cave bat survey
and three additional cave surveys.
In the following days, no bones were determined to be broken.
Scott McCrea, Cave Chat, 13 January 2006
Jonathan Mays, Incident Report, 15 July 2006
Comments: The adrenalin spike and drop from the fall might
have caused the dizziness and consciousness loss. Watch your
teammates closely when they have sustained a "mechanism of
injury."


********** 24 January
Lost Creek Cave, Georgia
stranded, inadequate equipment, no injury, aid
Five men and a puppy became stranded in Lost Creek Cave after
their flashlights died. It was said that they had been in the cave
many times before and "knew what they were doing." Ty
Johnson, Syrus Gordy III, Kenneth Eares, Bradley White,
another man, and a puppy had gone to the cave after work.
Around midnight, the families realized they were together and,
after asking around, found they had said they "were going
caving". Syrus Gordy Jr. found the dog's leash and othe items
outside the entrance, and the Walker County Cliff-Cave Rescue
was called at 1 AM.
The Walker County team established entrance control and
started a hasty search at 3:52 AM, breaking into sub-teams
inside the cave for a systematic check. A phone was established
at the first junction. The spelunkers were located at 4:45 AM and
they were out by 5 PM after 15 hours in the cave. Their two
flashlights had died.
Kelly Jackson, Catoosa County News, "trapped (sic) in cave
rescued." 26 January 2006.
Diane Cousineau, Incident Report, 27 January 2006
Stump Martin, Chattanooga Times Free Press, "5 people, puppy
rescued after stranded in cave." 26 January 2006
Comments: After two hours, when they were a long way from
the entrance, the second of the spelunkers' two small flashlights
died and. A clue found during the search was a pile of dog
poop.


********** 8 February
Hurricane Cave, Georgia
caver fall, hypothermia, injury, aid
While on a 14-person trip (4 adults and 10 children) by the
Georgia Department of Human Resources, a 16-year-old boy fell
about 300 feet inside Hurricane Cave. One of the leaders said
that the cave was slick, and after slipping and falling, the boy
complained of neck pains and could not move his extremities.
He also had a concussion and was becoming hypothermic. The
call went out at 2:30 PM and the Dade County Mountain Rescue
team, and the Walker County Cave-Cliff Rescue team
responded.
Access to the cave is through a 165-foot-long culvert beneath
Interstate 59. The boy was packaged in a Junkin litter with
warm blankets and transported by helicopter when he reached
the surface.
Stump Martin, Chattanooga Time Free Press, "Teen rescued
after caving at Rising Fawn." 9 February 2006
Diane Cousineau, Incident Report, 9 February 2006
unattributed, Dade County (GA) Sentinel, "Caver Rescued After
Fall." 15 February 2006

---------- Page 10 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Comments: It was noted that a SKED or other plastic litter
would have worked better. The helicopter transport was because
of the boy's hypothermia, but he had rewarmed during the
extrication. The group had been in the cave before.


********** 8 February
Mana Nui Cave, Hawaii
caver fall, injury
On February 8th Art Palmer, Peg Palmer, Nevin Davis and Judy
Davis were planning to map the Mana Nui Cave area (AA17
Entrance) of Hualalai Ranch Cave. While the rest of the group
pondered how to descend into the sinkhole (sharp-edged puka
about 12 feet deep), Art circled around to the other side to
get a better perspective. While walking through the tall fountain
grass, he stepped into a hidden hole. A small ledge broke under
his weight and he fell 12.5 feet and landed on his lower back on
breakdown. A careful self-examination showed no apparent
damage, and he was able to greet the rest of the party, who
scrambled down in the nearby puka. The mapping trip
continued as planned. Later medical tests showed no injuries,
aside from a sore and discolored lower back. His symptoms
disappeared within a month.
Cindy Heazlit, Incident Report, 6 March 2006
Art Palmer, Incident Report, 19 April 2006
The Hamilton County Rescue Cave and Cliff Team responded.
Artfeets Analysis: Art was lucky to have landed on a fairly flat
rock. It is wise to be especially careful in lava terrain, where
openings tend to drop off sharply, in contrast to those in soluble
rock, most of which are funnel-shaped and offer more warning
of their presence.


********** 4 March
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
stranded, exhaustion, inadequate equipment, aid
trapped in Cave." 5 March 2006
Donald and Robin Lilly (both 36), Ken Fogle, and Tara Misner
entered Sharps Cave at 2:30 PM for an easy recreational trip.
Comments: Buddy Lane reported that she remained in good
The cave is very caver-friendly and is a popular destination to
spirits which must have benefited the rescuers during the effort.
take novice cavers. The group took an energy-draining round-
about route to the Waterfall Room.
The party rigged an etrier in the cave's tight, 7-foot entrance pit.
Ken and Tara were able exit just fine, having both been to the
cave previously. However, Donald and Robin were unable to
get back up the steep, slippery slot, even with the help of the
(20) and two friends went to Indecision Cave. David told his
etrier and became exhausted. Donald is big and had additional
trouble with the tight ascent.
a camera's memory card left from a previous trip. David is an
Pocahontas County Volunteer Search and Rescue was called and
experienced caver and had been in the cave several times before.
seven people responded. One of the cavers was sent to the
After two hours and his not returning, one of the two friends
entrance to make sure his friends had enough clothing to keep
hiked out of the canyon to call for help. The other waited at the
entrance.
warm, as the temperature on the surface was in the mid twenties.
Bill Liebman entered the cave and determined the cavers were
David went to the end of the cave, negotiating 600 feet of
not too large to get out the passage and only needed the proper
passageway in some large, well-decorated rooms, and rappelled
equipment to ascend. He improvised a two-rope ascending
down a 40-foot pit at the end of the room. He ascended the pit
system he dubbed the "West Virginia Ropewalker. A foot loop
to the narrow squeeze at the top of the pit, which is on slick, wet
was tied in the bottom of each rope and dropped into the
flowstone. At that point he came off rope and fell back into the
entrance. The trapped spelunkers each placed one foot in each
pit, sustaining a concussion and short term memory loss.
of the loops, and they were hauled from the cave by alternating
One hundred seventy rescuers from eight agencies, including
standing in each loop, while their rescuers pulled up the other
three military units and cavers responded. Many of the rescuers
rope. They were able to relax their upper bodies while
ascending with their legs. The actual name of this ascending
system is Bilgeri technique. They were out in a half hour.
Bill Liebman, Incident Report, 6 March 2006
George R. Dasher, Incident Report, 8 March 2006.
Comments: Both Donald and Robin were reported to be over
weight. That, the tight entrance, and their inexperience and
exhaustion contributed to the problem. They also had no packs.


********** 5 March
Raccoon Mountain Caverns, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, aid
On March 5th, an eleven-person church group went on a guided,
commercial, wild caving tour at Raccoon Mountain Caverns.
The group members were all adults. About 3:30 PM, first-time
caver, Barbara (49), slid down a 25 to 30-foot incline called the
Sandpaper Slide about 2000 feet inside the cave and dislocated
her right ankle, turning it at a 90-degree angle. Fortunately,
there was a doctor and a nurse in the group. The injury was
diagnosed and the trip leader, Patty Perlaky, made the 30 minute
trip out of the cave to call for rescue and return with warm
blankets.
Barbara was given morphine by the doctor and the dislocation
was reduced. She was moved up the narrow passage and
packaged in a Ferno litter. The evacuation continued until
reaching the surface about 8:30 PM, where Barbara was
transported to the hospital.
Buddy Lane, Patty Perlaky, Incident Report undated
Staff Report, Chattanooga Times Free Press, no title, 6 March
unattributed, Chattanooga News Channel 9 (WTVC), "Woman


********** 16 March
Indecision Cave, Arizona
caver fall, injury, aid
While on spring break from Duke University, David Shipman
friends to wait in the cave's first room while he went to retrieve

---------- Page 11 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
had no cave rescue experience or training. Steve Willsey, a
nearby Kartchner Caverns State Park ranger and member of the
local grotto arrived, had been caving with David before and
knew the cave. Steve and fellow caver Doug Noble were able to
explain the difficulty of finding the cave and the obstacles
inside, and were allowed to lead two search teams into the cave
to look. Steve's team found David. David's ascender was still
on the rope at the top of the pit. David, at the bottom of the pit,
was still in his seat harness, and his non-locking carabineer gate
was tweaked so it would not close properly.
David was packaged in KED, SKED and when needed, in a
stokes litter. It took 60 in-cave rescuers 15 hours to move him
out, arriving at the entrance at 3 PM. A Blackhawk helicopter
lifted him off the mountain side and over to the Tucson Medical
Center. Amazingly, David was released the following day
having no other injuries than the concussion and amnesia of the
event.
Steve Willsey, Incident Report, 29 April 2006
unattributed, Associated Press, "Crews rescue caver in
Huachuca Mountains." 19 March 2006
Bill Hess, Sierra Vista Herald, "Man falls into cave pit on Fort
Huachuca, leading to lengthy rescue." 19 March 2006
Gentry Braswell, Sierra Vista Herald, "Man rescued from cave
on for release from Tucson hospital." 18 March 2006
unattributed, Arizona Daily Star, "Man who fell into cave pit
discharged from hospital." 19 March 2006
Tom Beal, Arizona Daily Star, "Caver ordeal cause of gap in
memory." 21 March 2006
Lorraine Rivera, KDVA News Channel 4, "Cave rescuers: 'It was
an amazing experience" 21 March 2006
Comments: David should not have been caving alone. Eight
rescue teams and four military units were involved with some of
the rescuers having little or no in cave experience. Crucial to the
efforts were that cavers Steve Willsey and Doug Noble were
able to convince authorities of the difficulties and allowed to
lead the hasty teams. There was some difficulty with cave
radios, but reports that two-meter SAR radios worked well. The
US Border search and rescue team, BORSAR, contributed
significantly. Due to the cave's sensitivity the cave's name was
never released to the media and was not published. Three trips
following the rescue were completed for restoration purposes.


********** 16 April
Elkhorn Mountain Cave, West Virginia
no injury, aid
There was a rescue of sorts in Grant County's Elkhorn Mountain
Cave on Sunday, April 16th. Two Canadian cavers exited the
145-foot entrance drop just fine, but a third had trouble because
of a large camera case. He rappelled back down, and the other
two tried to haul him out; however, the rope became caught.
The Potomac Speleological Society field house near Upper Tract
was called at about 6 PM and two car loads of people responded
with more rope. The third caver was able to get our under his
own power on the second rope (and presumably his camera
made it out also).
George Dasher, The West Virginia Caver, 6 June 2006


********** 18 April
Rockhouse Cave, Missouri
injury, aid
Three adults and seven students were on a field trip to
Rockhouse Cave near Cassville. During the trip, a 13-year-old
student, Dustin, slipped and fell about 8 feet while climbing a
chimney about a half mile inside the cave. He landed in a hole,
and began losing feeling in his feet. After the adults were
unsuccessful in freeing him, two adults escorted the remaining
students to the entrance. One adult remained with Dustin until
help arrived. Emergency personnel were called about noon.
Five rescue teams responded including three fire departments
and a Forest Service rescue team. They had no in-cave
communications equipment and their surface radios did not work
underground. Later a cave rescue team from Carroll County,
Arkansas responded.
The rescuers were able to free the boy and start an evacuation.
The patient was packaged in a SKED because of a possible back
injury. In some places they "swung Dustin over holes and
crevices" on the way out of the cave. Communication to the
surface was created with 30 people stationed along the route
orally passing messages back and forth.
The patient was packaged in a SKED because of a possible back
injury, and they reached the surface about 4:30 PM. A waiting
helicopter took Dustin to Springfield hospital where it was
determined he had no critical injuries.
Amos Bridges, News-Leader, "Boy hurt on school trip, pulled
from cave." 19 April 2006
unattibuted, Kansas City Star, "Teen is recued after fall in
cave. 20 April 2006
Melissa Yeager, KY3 News, Springfield, MO, "Rockhouse Cave
has narrow passages, steep dropoffs." 19 April 2006
Murray Bishoff, The Monett Times, "Monett firemen play key
role in cave rescue." 19 April 2006
Comments: The distance into the cave of the accident seems
inflated with respect to the time frames of the call out to
completion of the rescue. Another comment was "It was tough
for about 600 yards." The large response allowed the
communication problem to be overcome. The Red Cross
provided surface refreshments.


********** 7 May
Torque River Cave, Wyoming
injury, aid
Tim Peterson was rescued from Torque River Cave on May 7th.
He suffered extensive injuries from a 50-foot fall to both feet
and his back. Rescuers included the Dayton Fire-Rescue,
Sheridan Fire-Rescue and Sheridan SAR. Permanent paralysis is
not expected. Little more is known at this point about the fall or
the rescue.
Denise Keep, paid advertisement, The Sheridan Press, p. A2, 18
May 2006
Source: Gerald Forney

---------- Page 12 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 14 May
unnamed cave, Green Mountain, Alabama
stranded in pit, no injury, aid
Two men descended hand-over-hand down a 30-foot-deep cave
off the Green Mountain's Nature Trail near Huntsville. Rescue
crews were able to get them back up safely. One of the two was
too exhausted to make it back up the mountain.
unattributed, WAFF 48 News, "Man rescued while caving." 18
May 2006
Comments: This is listed under Caving Related because the
cave is only 30 feet long and does not meet Alabama cave
minimums.


********** 27 May
Sloans Valley Cave, Kentucky
fatigue, hypothermia, aid
A through trip was planned in Sloans Valley Cave System from
the Post Office Entrance to the Garbage Pit Entrance on
Memorial Day weekend. Steve Gladieux and eight novices
stayed up late the night before, and the next morning two
novices decided to stay on the surface and sleep. This reduced
the group to seven.
The group entered the 25-foot chimney Post Office Entrance at
11 AM and expected to be out the Garbage Pit Entrance at 6 PM.
They made several side trips, including a visit to the Fountain of
Youth and the Big Room's north overlook, and they discovered
that the bolts had been cut at the Big Room's south overlook.
However, since everyone was getting tired and the return trip
was 2.5 hours of solid caving Steve lowered each person down
about 8 feet to a ledge, then rappelled down himself using a
munter hitch. He pulled the rope because he needed it for the
swim at the First Lake Room. With time getting short they
headed for the Garbage Pit, some 40 minutes away.
The water beyond was 35 feet higher than the last time Steve
had been in the cave. After encountering thigh-deep water in the
Big Room and crossing the Hogback in good spirits, he
discovered the bypass at Echo Junction was sumped. The group
had only two headlamps that were totally waterproof. Darshan
(last name and age not known) volunteered to do the 175-foot
swim and provide light for the others, so he took one of the
waterproof lights and started swimming trailing the 70-foot,
8mm rope with a dry bag buoy at the other end. Before reaching
the end of the swim, he became very fatigued and yelled "Help!"
before disappearing under water.
Steve is a trained lifeguard. He jumped into the water, causing
his light to go out. When he reached Darshan after the long
swim, Darshan was intermittently underwater and coming up
and gasping for air. In his panic of drowning, Darshan tried to
climb onto Steve to keep his head above water, causing them
both to go under. Steve was able to push Darshan to a steep,
slick, entrance side mud bank. Darshan could not stand up and
could barely talk so Steve used the 8mm rope to haul him up the
bank. Darshan was seriously hypothermic and unable to shiver.
He had dilated pupils, was slurring words, had no motor control
(fine or major), could not express complete thoughts and was
drifting in and out of consciousness. Steve shook him awake,
told him to eat, yelled to the others to try and keep him awake,
and swam into the next lake towards the entrance.
He alerted the two novices on the surface of the situation. They
had no flotation devices in camp, SO he ran to the nearby
landowner's house and called a cave rescue. The first rescuer
arrived in ten minutes while Steve gathered supplies to go back
in. The rescuer and Steve had a heated discussion on whether
Steve should be allowed to go back in, as the rescuers needed
someone to show them the way. Steve immediately went back
in with 200 foot of thin rope, food, water, warm dry clothes, and
a blanket, all of which were enclosed in several trash bags. He
was back at Darshan's side about 40 minutes after leaving him.
He had Darshan strip and dried him off, gave him food and
water, and Darshan immediately started to improve. It took the
rescue squad five hours to get him across the lake. The rescue
took a total of 11 hours.
Steve Gladieux, The Kentucky Caver, "Accident Report: Sloans
Valley Cave System, Memorial Day weekend May 2006." 2
June 2006
John LaMar Cole, The Kentucky Caver, "Rescue at Sloans." 2
June 2006
unattributed, WKYT 27 News First, "Rescue Workers Save Six
Trapped Cavers." 29 May 2006
Comments: Several items led to this incident: experience-to-
novice ratio, fatigue from pre-trip activities, a much higher water
level, inadequate waterproof lights, and borrowed equipment.
Steve was lucky no one died, and the only thing that saved
Darshan was Steve's strength as a caver. A local news team
interviewed John LaMar Cole, but were only told the cavers had
"exceeded their limitations" but "had otherwise had done
everything as they should".


********** 13 June
Snail Shell Cave, Tennessee
lost, inadequate equipment, aid
At 5:30 PM, Tim Hernandez, Jr. and Matthew Donald Corns,
(both 18), were dropped off to enter the 13-mile-long Snail Shell
Cave (without the permission required by the landowner (the
Southeastern Cave Conservancy). When they did not return, a
call initiated a search at 2:30 AM. Because it was not known if
they were in the cave, a surface search with land manager Bob
Biddix was conducted, followed by a search of the men's homes,
and an interview with the person who dropped them off.
The Hamilton County Rescue Cave and Cliff Team responded
and a hasty search was made of the dry Goo-Pan Alley passages.
At 6:30 AM, a communications team set up field phones at a
junction room 300 feet inside the cave. On the way in, they
found two cell phones and a small flashlight. Based on the last
phone call placed on the cell phone, it was suspected that the two
lost teenagers were probably still in the cave. At 8:30 AM, two
search teams went in to search the downstream portions; one
searching dry passages and the other searching wet passages.
Their destination was the Gnome Chamber. A third team led by
Jim Hickman, with John Hoffelt, Jason Hardy, and paramedic
Chris Gandy started to search the Grand Canal section from the
Clark Entrance at 9:30 AM. This section has large borehole
passage with ankle-to-waist deep water and, although it was

---------- Page 13 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
thought there would be little likelihood that the two teenagers
would be found here, a search was initiated. This group found
that the cave register had been dumped and that the last entry of
May 17th, a month earlier.
After a brief link up and conversation with the second team at
the end of The Link, the third team continued the search. At
10:35 AM, the missing teenagers were found standing on the
side of the passage out of the water. They were both dressed in
cotton running shorts and tee shirts, and had running shoes.
Both had energizer LED headlamps and second AA battery light
sources. The batteries had died. After a brief medical check,
they were escorted out the Clark Entrance where they refused to
be transported to the hospital. It took several hours for all of the
rescue personnel to exit. The two had been underground for
over 17 hours.
John Hickman, Incident Report, 19 June 2007
Lisa Marchesoni, The Daily News Journal, "Two teens found
safe in cave." 15 June 2006
Doug Davis, The Daily News Journal, "Snail Shell unique
ecosystem." 15 June 2006
Lisa Marchesoni, The Daily News Journal, "They are safe, I'm
glad my boy's OK." 15 June 2006
Comments: Several very poor decisions led up to this rescue,
including entering without permission, and inadequate lights,
equipment or clothing. While being led out of the cave, the two
teanagers told their rescuers they "just wanted to explore".


********** 2 July
Airman's Cave, Texas
aid
A group of unknown size was exploring Airman's Cave south of
Austin on Sunday, July 2nd, which contains sections that are tight
and crawly. After they were about 1000 feet inside the cave, a
woman either would not or could not come back out. Members
of the group went to the surface and called 911, probably about 4
PM. It took rescuers about two hours to reach the woman. Once
the rescuers reached her, she became "motivated" and was able
to make it to the surface under her own power. She did not
appear to be injured, and she reached the surface about 10:15
PM. About 50 Austin firefighters and EMS personnel were on
the scene, both in and outside of the cave.
Quita Culpepper, KVUE-TV News, Austin, TX. "Woman rescued
from cave." 3 July 2006
unattributed, KXAN-TV News, Austin, TX, "Rescuers Pull
Woman From Cave." 3 July 2004.
Melissa McGuire, KVUE-TV News, Austin, TX. "Warning issued
about exploring Austin caves." 3 July 2006
Comments: Little more is known about this incident. News
reports do not agree on times of when a problem was
determined, reporting time of party, the actual problem, and the
number in group.


********** 9 July
Dam #4 Cave, Maryland
fall, injury, aid
Three teenagers went into Dam #4 Cave along the C&O Canal.
At 8:52 PM and 150 feet inside the cave, one of the three
teenagers (16) fell about 12 feet where he received deep cuts on
his forehead and a possible broken wrist. One of the other two
teenagers ran to the entrance and yelled for help. The
Williamsport Volunteer Fire Company responded and the hurt
teen was packaged in a stokes litter and transported to the
entrance.
Karen Hanna, Herald-Mail.com, "Youth trapped in cave." 10
July 2006
unattributed, WHAG-TV News, Hagerstown, MD, "Cave Update:
Teen Trapped in Cave Rescued." 9 July 2006
Herald-Mail.com, "Police briefs." 11 July 2006
Comments: No mention of the teens having helmets, boots, or
other equipment was mentioned in the reports. There was a
SKED present, but the rescuers used a Stokes litter because it
was easier and safer.


********** 4 August
Glade Cave, Virginia
stuck, injury, aid
Emily Bacon (13) went with the Girl Scouts to Glade Cave as
the final major activity before leaving a week-long camp at
Camp Mayflower. Their group (10 girls and 4 four adults) was
properly equipped and supervised, and they had received pre-trip
caving ethics training.
Emily slipped and slid between two boulders while doing a
downclimb about 300 feet from the entrance. Her entire right
side was stuck and her chest was wedged between the rocks
(which hurt). After several unsuccessful attempts, a counselor
went to the nearby farmer (the landowner) to call for help while
four stayed with Emily. The counselors covered Emily's
accessible areas with blankets and made sure they kept her
spirits high while waiting for help.
Several rescue squads responded, including the Mount Solon
Volunteer Rescue Squad, who physically released her from the
crack. She was wedged for over two hours.
Patty Smith is the director of the camp, has been running the
adventure program for 24, years and has been caving for 27
years. Her staff receives training and the camp has set policies
for caving trips.
Eileen M. Carlton, Lounoun Times-Mirror, "Ashburn girl
survives cave ordeal." 15 August 2006
David Royer, Newsleader.com, Central Shenandoah Valley,
"Girl gets stuck in cave." 5 August 2006
Lauren McKay, WHSV-TV, Harrisonburg, VA, "Teenager Gets
Stuck in Cave." 6 August 2006
Comments: The camp director has consistently run safe caving
trips over the years.

---------- Page 14 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 5 August
Church Mountain Cave, Virginia
rock fall, injury, aid
A Camp Horizon youth group caving trip was underway when a
rock fell, breaking the leg of a 19-year-old man. It took six
rescue personnel about two hours to get him out.
WHSV-TV, "Caving Accident Rockingham County." 6 August
Comments: Little more is known about this incident.


********** 12 August
Fitton Cave, Arkansas
lost, no injury, aid,
During a trip to Fitton Cave in the Buffalo National River, two
cavers became separated from the other four in an area of
extensive breakdown. The group of four exited the cave
thinking the other two were in front of them. The remaining
two, who had each been in the cave twice before, tried to find
their way out, but became confused at the a key point in the East
Passage. They sat down to wait for rescue.
At 11 PM, the park service was notified and a search and rescue
operation was initiated. At 3 AM on August 13th, a hasty search
team consisting of one NPS employee and three caver volunteers
entered the cave and headed to the point last seen. The cavers
were found in good shape at 5:35 AM about one mile inside the
cave. They and their rescuers were out by 7 AM. Another team
went in a 6 AM to de-rig communication wire and remove
flagging tape. This effort was completed by 9 AM.
Chuck Bitting, Inside Earth, Vol. 9 No. I, "Cave Rescue.",
Summer 2006
Comments: None.


********** 17 August
Peppersauce Cave, Arizona
lost, aid
On a Thursday evening, three people (two women and a man
ages 20, 18 and 18 respectively) decided to visit Peppersauce
Cave in southern Arizona. The cave has about 7000 feet of
mapped passages and mazy area in the back beyond the "Rabbit
Hole." The group was at least moderately well-equipped, with a
pack containing extra lights, batteries, three lunches, water
bottles, wallets with IDs, and a digital camera. None had a
helmet, although they had Tika-like LEDs on headstraps.
After exploring the front part of the cave, they found a small low
opening which was almost sumped with water. They decided to
check it out (in the spirit of exploration); however, not wanting
to get their pack wet (which contained their extra lights), they
decided to leave it behind. The group explored on (beyond the
Rabbit Hole and the partial sump) and completed a loop before
trying to get out but failed to see the route back. The route is
more obscure from the exiting direction. They went around the
loop at least five more times, during which they took pages from
the register in the back of the cave and wrote "No" on the pages
and left them at passages they had checked. After several hours
of literally going in circles, their lights began to fade. They had
no spares with them so they decided to wait for help.
They had told their families where they were and the families
called the police once the party was overdue. The sheriff deputy
confirmed the car in the parking area at 9 PM. Southern Arizona
Rescue Association (SARA) and cavers responded. At 6 AM, a
three-person hasty team of SARA members entered and quickly
found the abandoned pack. Wallets and the pictures on the
digital camera confirmed where the explorers had been, along
with date and time stamps. The embarrassed group was found
uninjured about 20 minutes later. They were escorted out of the
cave along with other rescuers from Escabrosa Grotto.
Steve Smith, Cave Crawlers Gazette, AZ. "Rescue in
Peppersauce Cave." October 2006, Vol. 48, No. 10.
Comments: This group was better prepared than many people
going to Peppersauce; however, they forgot to keep looking back
and they left their pack. The man (18) felt thirsty, so he found a
pool and took a drink. This cave receives a large amount of
traffic and the pools are unsanitary. The group was smart to tell
their families where they had gone and when they expected to
return.


********** 19 August
Bigfoot Cave, California
rock fall, injury, no aid
A group of eight cavers went into the Discovery Entrance of
Bigfoot Cave on a Saturday to push climbing leads. They split
into a scouting group and a climbing group, and the climbing
group went to the Cthulu Room because it contained several
climbs that seemed doable in a day.
The climbing group picked a tall lead in the room and had just
finished placing their forth bolt when Greg Milano and John
Lane returned from the Dry Borehole scouting group. Suddenly
the boulder Greg was on started to shift, and Greg said "Whoa!!
John! Are you clear?" John replied with a, "No! No! I'm not
clear!" This was followed by a terrible sound of crashing
boulders and horrific screams by both John and Greg. Then
there were screams for help. Both groups converged.
The floor and ceiling of the choke had simultaneously collapsed
sending John into a freefall. He fell about ten feet before
stopping and was pinned between the boulders below. The
majority of the "Geo Metro-sized" boulders stopped, wedged
above him. His left leg was smashed and another boulder had
rolled on top of his chest. Amazingly, he was able to slither out
from under the rocks, but it was obvious that his left leg was
badly injured. It was decided that John could make it to the
entrance with help, so a self rescue effort began. Some people
provided aid, and others located the easiest route. The group
arrived back at the entrance at 1 AM, and John was able to
hobble and hike out to the trailhead the next morning. X-rays
showed he had broken is fibula (smaller, lower leg bone) below
the knee.
John Lane and Matt Covington, Incident Report, 24 August 2006
Bern Szukalski, NSS News, "Underground Update." of the
Shasta Area Grotto, CA. Jan-Feb, 2007 SAG Rag, June 2007

---------- Page 15 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Comments: The unstable rock was on the main route and
countless cavers had climbed across it. With the remoteness of
the cave, a serious injury could become a fatality if not properly
executed.


********** 3 September
Langdon's Cave, Indiana
stranded, inadequate equipment, aid
Ben Fortner (21), Zack Miller, and Katie Condit went on a into
Langdon's Cave to explore the "Keyhole," a 38-foot deep pit
they had been unable visit on the previous trip. The pit is some
500 feet from the entrance. The threesome had a permit to enter
the cave and were equipped with helmets with headlights, three
flashlights, and dynamic rope, but no rappelling or ascending
gear. The pit has two parts, with the shorter, top part being the
easier of the two. Ben hand-over-handed down the pit, but was
unable to get back up without equipment, so Zack was sent for
help, and a rescue team arrived with an extra set of ascending
gear. Ben was shown how to use it and climbed out.
Charlie White, Courier Journal, "Ohio man rescued from cave
in Indiana." 4 September 2006
Ben Fortner, Cavechat, posted 8 October 2006
Ben Fortner, email to Bill Putnam, 5 January 2007
Comments: The group was not trained or equipped to drop the
pit. They did have the needed permit, so a ticket was not issued.
Ben logged onto Cavechat to provide more accurate information.
His reported injured hand by the media was merely a scratch and
not worth mentioning. Dayton Underground Grotto has
attempted to make contact with the group.


********** 16 September
Crooked Creek Ice Cave, Kentucky
rock fall, injury, aid
Five Boy Scout leaders and three scouts entered the the lower
entrance of Crooked Creek Ice Cave at 10:40 AM. The group
was properly equipped with the appropriate light sources,
helmets, and suitable clothing. The trip leader and one other
member were experienced cavers and knew the cave.
At 1:20 PM, while waiting at the bottom of an climb
approximately 300 feet from the upper entrance, a large rock
(60'isl pounds) was dislodged, striking Assistant Scoutmaster
Mike Byrne (45). The rock fell 10 to 15 feet and struck Burne
on the left side of his face below the helmet and left shoulder.
He lost consciousness for about two minutes and was not aware
during the following extraction.
A physician in the party provided immediate medical care. The
trip leader is a firefighter and paramedic and coordinated in-cave
movement of the patient. A cave rescue phone chain was
activated. A third adult in the party was a firefighter and EMT,
and he coordinated the vertical rope extraction at the cave's
upper entrance. Other cavers and members of the scout troop
provided additional manpower.
A Stokes litter was obtained from the nearby Great Saltpeter
Cave Preserve shelter house. Burne was placed in the Stokes
and carried to the upper entrance, where the vertical lift system
had been rigged. A helicopter had arrived and Burne was
airlifted from the entrance area at approximately 3:20 PM.
Trey Ferris, Incident Report, 16 September 2006
Bob Ausdenmoore, email to GCGrotto user group, 20 September
Comments: This is about as close as a cave rescue team can get
to achieving "the golden hour" from the accident to the hospital.
Besides a concussion, Burne sustained a small temporal bone
skull fracture, two traverse spine fractures to L4 and L5, and
three fractures in his pelvis and groin region due to impact load
transmission through his body. He has no recollection of the trip
and his recovery was expected to be six to eight weeks.


********** 18 September
Fitton Cave, Arkansas
caver fall, injury, aid
Jeff Holt (37), Ron Burke (37), Brian Alley (41), and Joe Hovis
(35) entered Fitton Cave at 8:30 AM, on Monday morning and
headed for the Tennari Room before. They made it to the Out
Room before noticing the time (2:30 PM) and started out of the
cave. Upon entering the T-Room, Brian and Tom took the high
right route. Joe and Jeff took the slide to the left. At the bottom
of the slide is a four-foot high jump. Joe made the jump without
difficulty. When Jeff jumped and landed, he heard a loud "pop"
from his left ankle, he crumpled to the ground. He stood,
thinking he had sprained his ankle and crumpled again. The
lower end of the tibia (larger, lower leg bone) was broken. The
group decided to leave the boot on to reduce swelling.
Jeff was able to crawl and hop to the Manhole Entrance. The
group tied a rope and he was able to ascend with assistance from
the team. They then tied a rope to a Swiss sea,t and Jeff was able
to descend a rope ladder with his good leg while the others held
his weight so he could reposition himself after each move. They
then met Charles Angle, who left to contact the park service.
The park service in turn provided access through a gated access
road. The group moved a half mile down the trail, assisting Jeff
to the access road. He was then loaded into a truck and made the
trip to the hospital.
Jeff Holt, Incident Report, 10 October 2006
Comments: The team performed an appropriate self rescue given
their level of experience and the injury.


********** 19 November
Rio Camuy Cave, Puerto Rico
fatality, drowning
Winfredo Lopez Luquis (34), Carlos Acevedo Lopez, and two
other experienced cavers were guiding a group of 13 local
tourists (three of them adults) through Rio Camuy, in the
Resurgencia area (resurgence). Sometime during the morning,
Winfredo was advised by one of his teammates to change to
another area where the river was reported to be roaring at 200
cubic feet per second. They re-routed the trip and traveled a
long distance to get the extreme experience.
This section of Rio Camuy is essentially a channel with walls up
to 40 feet high and it had been raining hard in the river basin the

---------- Page 16 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
day before. The group rappelled down the 40-foot-high wall to a
river ledge. The rope was long enough and they decided to body
belay one of the guides to inspect the river while in the water, as
the group needed an escape route. Carlos clipped into his harness
and moved near a 6-foot-high waterfall hydraulic (to protect the
group from being exposed to that area).
For some reason that is not well understood, Wilfredo decided to
have a look and clipped into the belay line. He was advised three
times not to but he did anyway and suddenly fell into the water.
The tension on the line caused Carlos to fall in as well. Both
went down behind the waterfall hydraulic in seconds.
Carlos managed to turn and divert the water over his back to get
a breath of air. Wilfredo did not have a chance to do this. Both
struggled for their for their lives. Carlos tried five times to reach
Wilfredo while attached to the line. He was able to touch
Wilfredo on three occasions, but was unable to bring him back
to the surface. The tension on the line caused the line to stick,
and the belayer was not able to remove the line from the
carabiner in time to free them. Eventually he was successful, but
it was too late.
Carlos and Wilfredo were washed out of the hydraulic and
another guide jumped into the water to help. Carlos managed to
untie himself and Wilfredo, and to haul Wilfredo up onto a rock
ledge and start CPR, but he was not able to get a response.
Carlos got out of the river and ran to make a phone call. The
message was clear: there was an accident and Wilfredo had
drowned.
At 12:09 PM, Efrain Mercado, the NCRC Caribbean Region
Coordinator, responded and activated the emergency system.
They escorted the 13 tourists out of the cave and then returned to
recover Wilfredo's body. The recovery ran smoothly, the way
they knew Wilfredo would have liked it to progress. They
stopped at 4:00 PM and had a minute of silence to honor him.
Efrain Mercado, NCRC Winter Meeting, Caribbean Region


********** Report, 3 Feburary 2007
Gerald Lamb, endi.com, "Fatal tour of espeleologo." 21
November 2006
Comments: Water is a very powerful and unstoppable force and
should always be treated with respect. Wilfredo had finished his
NCRC IQ level in Aguadilla in April 2006.
The next 15 days were hard on the rescue team and some sought
post trauma assistance.


********** 23 November
Clay Cave, West Virginia
stuck, no injury, aid
Katelyn Mallabone (17) was taken on her first caving trip by
Leslie Lubaczenski and Tom Carrow. The cave was thought to
be a good beginner's cave due to its small size and lack of
difficulty. Katelyn was moving through a passageway that
requires some canyoning about 50 feet inside the entrance, when
she slipped down and into a lower portion of the passage. She
became pinned between a sloping right wall and a rock spur on
the left wall.
The Bluefield Virginia Fire and Rescue responded to the 911
call. They were able to chisel away some of the impinging rock
spur and cut away excess clothing to make her "smaller." The
cavers on the original trip were "allowed" to help in the rescue,
and Leslie chimneyed above Katelyn and pulled upward with a
webbing sling placed under Katelyn's arms.
Leslie Lubaczewski, Incident Report, 26 November 2006
unattributed, WVVA-TV 6 News, Bluefield WV. "Thanksgiving
Day Rescue." 23 November 2006
Comments: This could have been a self rescue with a caver with
more experience. In addition, a call to another caver to come out
with a hammer and chisel could have freed the trapped caver. It
was also mentioned that the local media hyped the minor rescue.


********** 25 November
Bear Hollow Rift, Alabama
stranded, exhaustion, no injury, aid
Eight cavers, including Andy Zellner, Jim Smith, Bill Steele, and
Jay Jorden, entered the cave together and proceeded to the
bottom, descending a series of pits and climbdowns. The cave is
physically demanding, with tight, narrow passages and
crawlways in addition to the pits. The third pit (45 feet), located
about 100 feet into the cave, has a narrow and undercut lip with
a protruding horn of rock that impedes the caver's movement.
Some of the cavers, including Jorden, had difficulty negotiating
the lip on the way in. Smith tied a two-step etrier of one-inch
tubular webbing and left it clipped to a bolt at the drop to
provide some aid. Beyond the pit, a wet crawl leads to
additional drops and climbdowns. Jorden, who was wearing a
wetsuit and dragging a large pack, moved slowly and the group
to wait for him at times.
The cavers separated into two groups at the bottom of the cave.
Zellner, Smith, Steele, and Jorden planned to spend several
hours surveying before heading for the surface. The other four
decided to return to the surface. They invited Jorden to
accompany them, but he declined, stating that he would help
with the survey for a while and then start out ahead of the
remaining three cavers. The four exiting non-surveying cavers
reached the surface at 6:15 PM.
Some time later, Jorden decided to start out by himself while
Zellner, Smith, and Steele wrapped up their surveying. When
the three remaining surveyors completed their work, they made
their way toward the entrance and eventually caught up with
Jorden at the 45-foot pit. Jorden was having difficulty at the top,
and could not get over the lip and into the crawl beyond. The
protruding rock horn made the lower part of the passage into a
fissure too small for him to pass, and he could not get his upper
body above and past the obstruction. Jorden was using a
Ropewalker System with a chest roller plate. Even by standing
on the etrier he was unable to make the transition from the
climbing rope to the crawlway. The cavers began trying
everything they could think of to help Jorden negotiate the top of
the pit, including changing his climbing system to a Texas
System for more freedom of movement. After three hours of
unsuccessful effort, Jorden became fatigued and descended to
the bottom of the pit. While Jorden rested, Smith, Steele, and
Zellner climbed the final two drops (10 and 25 feet) and exited

---------- Page 17 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
the cave. They returned with a jacket, dry clothing, food, and
water. Jorden changed out of his wetsuit and settled down to
wait. Steele and Zellner hiked to the vehicles, decided Jorden
could get out if the rock horn was removed, and called Bill
Putnam at 4:15 AM. The Chattanooga/Hamilton County Cave
and Cliff Team and the Jackson County Rescue Squad
responded.
Rescuers took equipment, including hammer drills, a bolt kit,
and rock-shaving kit to remove the horn. They entered the cave
at 8:50 AM and quickly made contact with Jorden who was
waiting at the bottom of the pit. He was uninjured and in
reasonably good condition.
The rescuers removed the horn by drilling a series of holes with
the hammer drill and using the rock-shaving kit to split away the
stone. They then set a bolt to allow better access to the crawl
from the rope. Jorden reached the surface at 10:55 AM, tired but
uninjured, just over 24 hours into the trip.
Bill Putnam, Incident Report, 26 November 2006
Buddy Lane, email to Bill Putnam, "Thanksgiving Weekend
cave Rescue." 28 November 2006
unattributed, Chattanoogan, "Local Squad Rescues Stranded
Texas Man In Alabama Cave." 28 November 2006
Comments: All three cavers interviewed independently reported
that Jorden appeared to be "out of shape" and "out of practice"
with his ascending system. Jay did know how to change over
and descend, and had the energy to complete this. The
Ropewalker system was not the best vertical system for these
conditions.


********** 25 November
Sloans Valley Cave, Kentucky
fatality, caver fall
Chris Webb led a trip with Edward Martin (40), and Douglas
Meyer (33), and four others into Sloans Valley Cave around 3:30
PM, from the Garbage Pit Entrance. They explored part of the
cave and decided to leave. The group split into two groups, as
some thought the shorter route (that Martin was taking) was too
dangerous. The three cavers ahead of Martin made the climb up
56-foot "Screaming Willy" pit safely, but Martin, last in the
group of four, slipped and fell between 12 and 25 feet (reports
vary) near the "Keyhole." He was not wearing a helmet or
harness and had a hand-held flashlight. It was about 6:30 PM.
He peeled backward and landed on the back of his head and
neck, causing a basal skull fracture and resultant hemorrhage.
Those that had exited went to report that Edward had fallen and
that a rescue was necessary. Though reported in the media that
CPR was performed, there is no indication that this occurred.
Cavers camped nearby were notified by the landowner of the fall
and responded immediately. Don Franklin of the Pulaski
County Rescue Squad coordinated the body extraction and the
team placed a helmet on the body for transport.
John LaMar Cole, email, "Re: Sloan's Valley Cave Accident 25
November 2006." 18 December 2007
Staff Report, Lexington Herald-Leader, "Cave explorer falls to
death attempting risky exit." 27 November 2006
Staff Report, Cincinnati Post, "Price Hill man dies in cave
accident." 28 November 2006
Andy (NSS 45709), CaveChat, "Re: Caver Dies in Sloans
Valley Cave." 3 December 2006
No author, The Cincinnati Enquirer, "Cave fall kills Cincinnati
man." 27 November 2006
Comments: This had been an annual Thanksgiving weekend trip
for the group for 10 to 12 years. Chris Webb and the group had
been warned repeatedly by cavers about the dangers of caving
without helmets. Edward was still caving after this long period
without a helmet. The "Screaming Willy" Entrance has been
closed to cavers due to the incident.


********** 2 December
Viking Cave, Alabama
stranded, inadequate equipment, aid
Ethan Lithgow (18) and Jonathan Gladden (21) had gone into
the cave around noon with a dynamic rope, but with no rope
pads, racks, or organized climbing systems other than prussic
knots. They had no helmets and had been in the cave several
times before as a family friend owns the land. The cave has
some very tight passage near the entrance with vertical
climbdowns of 14, 7, and 12 feet. This was followed by a tight
vertical fissure and drops of 40 and 29 feet. Ethan is 6 foot tall
and weighs 200 pounds. The two cavers bottomed the cave and
started back out, with both of them successfully getting-up the
29-foot pit. However, the prussic knots were slow for Ethan, so
he used a pulley and cam system for the 40 foot pit. Jonathan
ascended this pit first, followed by Ethan.
About 25 feet off the floor Ethan became tired, could not
continue, and could not change over. Jonathan tried for 30
minutes to help Ethan, but was unsuccessful so he went for help.
The call went out at 10 PM and Jonathan led firemen to the cave,
and started in at 10:15 PM.
Michelle Edwards with the Marshall County Rescue reached the
cave at 11 PM and Jonathan took her to Ethan. Other rescuers
tried to follow, but most would not fit. Michelle found Ethan
still hanging in his seat harness, semi-conscious, and
hypothermic. A small waterfall was trickling on him and he
could not feel his legs. Michelle tried to do a pick off but could
not get Ethan's weight off the rope. Kevin Arits of the Brindlee
Mountain Fire Cave and Cliff Team, and Kevin Perry,
Paramedic with Marshall Medium Rescue Team, were the only
others able to make it through the squeezes. The three rescuers
were working on a Z-rig hauling system (3 to 1 M.A.) when
Sabrina Simon arrived to help. The four cavers were able to get
Ethan up and into the crawlway at the top of the 40-foot pit and
started trying to warm him. He had been hanging in the harness
between four and five hours, was semi-conscious, hypothermic,
exhausted, and suffering from compression syndrome.
IV attempts were unsuccessful. Heat packs and blankets were
applied. Efforts were made to widen the passage constrictions
leading to the entrance. Ethan's jeans and shirt were removed
and replaced with a polypropylene top and pants, socks, and a
cap. He became more responsive as he warmed up. Three
bottles of oxygen and later, food and water were given. Rigging
on the surface was set up with a rebelay in the cave through

---------- Page 18 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
another, less constricted route with a 24 foot climb. Ethan was
not packaged in stretcher due to the tight passage. His harness
became the primary attachment point and the slow process began
to extract him. He reached the surface at 9 AM after many
hours underground
Jeff Burns, Incident Report, 2 December 2006
Bill Putnam, Interview with Jeff Burns, 2 December 2006
Bill Putnam, Interview with Jonathan Gladden, 4 December
Bill Putnam, Interview with Brian Bailey, 4 December 2006
Sabrina Simon, brinabat.blogspot.com/2006/12/endurance-
caving.html, 2 December 2006
Comments: Ethan spent four days in the hospital where, it was
confirmed that he suffered from compression syndrome. Seven
rescue teams responded but only small rescue team members
were able to reach the patient. Edwards is to be commended for
her efforts to do a pick-off, but it is a very rare caver who can
get a 200-pound caver switched-over to a descent and to the
bottom of the drop, particularly in wet conditions. With only
four cavers (particularly of small size), it is very much to their
credit that they were able to haul Ethan to the top of the drop.
They most assuredly saved his life by doing so.


********** 2 December
Pettijohns Cave, Georgia
overdue, aid
A youth group pastor, assistant and eight children entered the
cave between 11:30 AM and noon, planning to go to the
Waterfall and back. They were reported overdue when they did
not return by 9 PM. The Walker County Cliff-Cave Rescue
responded and located them approximately 1 AM Sunday
morning. They were moving slowly but were not lost. Some of
the kids were tired and had not eaten in 13 hours. They exited
the cave with assistance, but would have made it out on their
own in a few more hours.
Bill Putnam, notes, 2 December 2006
Comments: Food. If you get tired, eat. If you get cold, eat. To
the credit of the leaders, they slowed the pace of the group to
allow them to exit safely.


********** 7 December
South Pittsburg Pit, Tennessee
stranded on rope, aid, no injury
Robert Davidson (33) and Frank Maynard (36) decided to
bounce the 160-foot-deep South Pittsburg Pit using a 210-foot
rope. Before 11:00 AM, Robert rappelled first and about
halfway down, discovered the rope did not reach the bottom. He
attempted a change over to his Ropewalker System. He attached
the quick attach ascender (QAS), then removed his rack and
hooked up his ascenders, but failed to attach the chest harness
roller. The weight of the backpack on his back forced him to
lean back so far that he could not reach up to the QAS. There
were no other cavers at the pit, SO Frank dropped a second rope
and descended. He was unable to correct Robert's position, so
he ascended and called for help.
South Pittsburg Volunteer Fire Department responded quickly.
They lowered a rope and Robert was able to attach it to his
harness. Frank rappelled back down to the lip to help get Robert
and his gear over the lip. Five South Pittsburg firemen hauled
him up with a straight pull, still in the inverted position, and he
reached the top at 1 PM. Robert escaped with some minor
bruising.
Bill Putnam emails from Frank Maynard, 10, 11, 13, and 17
December 2007
Buddy Lane, notes, 11 December 2006
Brett King, Marion County News, Mountain Rescue, 14
December 2006
Comments: Robert had two years of vertical experience and
Frank had four years experience. They were equipped with
proper vertical equipment, but several things contributed to this
incident. The pit depth is measured from the lip, and the rig
point is 40+ feet up the slope. Robert did not tether his pack
below his seat harness, and he failed to connect his chest roller.
When inverted, he did not drop his pack or tie it to the rope
below.


********** 9 December
Hoya de las Guaguas, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
fatality, caver fall, detached from rope
Alejandro Vera Morales (43) was participating in the last day of
a technical caving course of the Asociación de Montañismo y
Exploración of the UNAM, to Hoya de las Guaguas. There were
28 in attendance and Alejandro was an instructor. Guaguas has
a 150-meter (490-foot) entrance pit. On Saturday, the ropes
were rigged and members rappelled in. Alejandro was the last
person to go in. During his rappel, he became detached from the
rope and fell from somewhere near the top. He died instantly.
EspeleoRescate Mexico and the Cave Rescue Division of the
Red Cross of San Luis Potosi responded. At 1:30 PM Sunday,
their ropes were rigged and the body reached the surface at 4:20
PM, followed by the remaining persons.
Manuel Casanova, Montañismo y Exploración, "Accident in the
Sótano de Guaguas." 11 December 2006
unattributed, El Sol de San Luis, """Explorer" dies after falling
150 meters." 11 December 2006
Héctor Manuel Espinoza, El Mañana de Valles, "Tourist killed
in Sótano 'Las Huahuas'." 13 December 2006
Comments: As the senior instructor, Alejandro was rappelling
last. Examination of his harness showed his carabineer was not
locked. Everyone should have someone independently check
your gear whenever possible. If you are alone, double check
your gear.


********** 10 December
Turtle Graveyard Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, inadequate equipment, injury, aid
Dustin Braden (21), his twin brother, and five others (ages 14 to
26) had been exploring caves for the past two months. At about
1 PM they had tied a rope to a tree, climbed down and explored
for several hours. When it was time to go one member climbed
out and Dustin followed. Dustin lost his footing a few feet from

---------- Page 19 ----------
2006 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
the top, could not hang on, and fell about 45 feet towards the
other five who were standing on a ledge below. His brother tried
to catch him, but they both fell another 30 feet. Dustin hurt his
back, left hip and left leg. Some of the others made it out of the
cave and went for help.
The Anderson County Rescue Squad and two fire departments
responded at 6 PM. The rescue team members were lowered
into the entrance, immobilized Dustin, packaged him in a stokes
litter, and hauled him to the surface. He was helicoptered to the
University of Tennessee Medical Center and the remaining party
members were hauled to the surface.
Catharyn Campbell, WATE News 6, "Man recovering after
falling 75 feet into dark cave." 11 December 2006
News Sentinel Staff, Knoxville News Sentinel, "Lucky fellow'
identified after fall in cave." 11 December 2006
Bob Fowler, Knoxville News Sentinel, "Brotherly love tested",


********** 12 December 2006
Comments: The party had none of the standard caving
equipment or training let alone vertical gear. Dustin's
brother, Justin, was able to slow his fall enough that the injuries
were not greater. Dustin wants to continue exploring caves but
his wife said he is not going back.


********** 29 December
Antonia Pit, Missouri
fatality, caver fall, inadequate equipment
Dave Wiegand (45) had spent time looking for arrowheads and
other artifacts in a nearby 30-foot-deep cave. He had heard there
Common Caving Mistakes and Consequences
1. Primary light failed; did not carry backup lights, or backup lights inadequate - stranded.
2. No map, no guide, and poor route-finding skills - lost.
3.
Wore inadequate or inappropriate clothing for conditions - hypothermia.
4. Did not bring extra clothing - hypothermia.
5. Moving but not paying attention - caver fall.
6. Free-climbing more than a body-length without belay - caver fall.
7. Traversing above drop without belay or safety line - caver fall.
8. Ignored rainy weather forecast; entered water cave - flood entrapment or drowning.
9. Careless movement in tight passage or crevice - stuck.
10. Entered bat cave or passage without precautions - histoplasmosis.
11. Solo caving and something went wrong - stranded.
12. Did not tell anyone of plans - delayed rescue by hours or days.
13. Did not clear loose rocks from lip - struck by falling rock.
14. Climbing or descending rope hand-over-hand - lost grip and fell.
15. Climbing cable ladder without belay - fell off.
16. Lost control of rappel; no bottom belay or rappel safety - fell to the bottom.
17. Out of shape or unfamiliar with climbing system - stranded on rope.
18. Did not know how to change from rappel to climb or from climb to rappel - stranded on rope.
19. Hair or clothing stuck in rappel device; did not know how to recover - stranded on rope.
20. Rappelling without wearing climbing system - stranded in pit or on rope.
21. Attempted pull-down trip without map or guide - stranded.
22. Sharing vertical gear; lost equipment passing it up or down the pit - stranded.
23. Did not tie a knot in the end of the rope - rappelled off the end and fell.
24. Moving around lip of pit without being belayed or being on rope - fell into pit.
25. Did not check attachment of rappel device to harness - became detached from rappel device and fell.
was a bigger cave around and he looked for it and found it.
When he came back with a rope, his wife, and three friends, he
tied his rope to one of the barbwire fence posts around the cave
entrance and started hand-over-handing down the rope through
the triangular, manhole-sized hole. Dave had left his flashlight
in a pack on the surface. He also had no helmet or light. His
wife stayed in contact with him by calling to him until he did not
respond. The 71-foot pit reaches a ledge and then there is
another 30 foot drop. The rope did not reach the bottom.
Wiegand's wife went for help about 3 PM saying, "Dave's stuck
in a hole." Jefferson County sheriff's office and several fire
departments arrived and reached Wiegand between 4 and 5 PM.
He was "unresponsive." The body was pulled to the surface.
Christine Byers, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, "Explorer found dead
at bottom of cave." 30 December 2006
Alex Fees, KSDK News, "Man Dies After Falling At Least 75
Feet Into Cave." 30 December 2006
Jo Schaper, email, 30 December 2006
Comments: It is speculated that he fell off the ledge due to lack
of light. Need it be said that people should not hand-over-hand
down a rope without a light where they can not see the bottom?

---------- Page 20 ----------
2006 Cave Diving Incident Reports
2006 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 14 June
Blue Springs, Florida
bad air, lost consciousness
Taylor Smith (17) was free diving in Blue Springs because "it's
a lot more hard-core (than scuba-diving)." He found a pocket of
air, took a breath, and suffered a seizure on his way back to the
surface. His younger brother Wesley dragged his unconscious
body from the water and started CPR, saving his life. In another
account when he surfaced, he began coughing up blood. Taylor
was rushed to a local hospital for treatment in a hyperbaric
oxygen therapy chamber.
unattributed, www.local6.com, Internet Broadcasting Systems,
"Teen Injured After Sucking In Diver's Carbon Dioxide." 14
June 2006
Willy Volk, Divester, "Teen fighting for His Life After
Breathing Scuba Diver's CO2, Update." 7 August 2006
Willy Volk, Divester, "Teen fighting for His Life After
Breathing Scuba Diver's CO2, Update." 15 June 2006
Comments: Their mother is an avid, certified diver. His
younger brother saved his life. Taylor professes to want to
continue the sport.
2006 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 4 March
Unnamed cave, San Diego, California
surfer trapped in cave
A 53-year-old surfer was pushed by waves into a cave entrance
below the Sunset cliffs near San Diego. Another surfer flagged
down lifeguards about 1 PM and relayed the problem. A
lifeguard went out to Osprey Point, dove off the cliff, and
located the surfer. "(The surfer) was getting thrown around as if
he was in a washing machine." After getting picked up by a surf
boat, the surfer was treated for cuts and scratches and released.
SignOnSanDiego News Service, www.SignOnSanDiego.com,
"Surfer rescued off Sunset Cliffs." 4 March 2006
Comments: None.


********** 6 April
unnamed Mammoth Mountain gas vent,
California
multiple fatalities, bad air, fall
Four ski patrollers, including Walter Rosenthal (58), John
"Scott" McAndrews (37), and Jaymes Juares (35), were on a
Mammoth Mountain ski patrol, repositioning a protective fence
around a gas vent at about 10,000 feet in elevation. Rosenthal
was a snow hydrology expert and researcher for the University


********** 15 July
unnamed cave, Chassahowitzka River, Florida
fatality, inadequate equipment
Four friends decided to go snorkeling and free diving into small
caves in the Chassahowitza River. At 3 AM, Jason Boyette (22)
was last to take his turn with the single set of gear and a
flashlight. He never came up and his friends called authorities at
3:30 AM after searching from the surface.
Sheriff's Office divers found the body stuck in the cave at 9 AM.
The tunnel was small and was only 10 to 12 feet long and two
feet in diameter. Boyette had to pass through one of three holes
to get to the tunnel.
Moises Mendoza, St. Petersburg Times, "Man drowns in
underwater Chassahowitzka cave." 16 July 2006
unattributed, Associated Press, "Man dies in Fla. Snorkeling
accident." 17 July 2006
Moises Mendoza, St. Petersburg Times, "Diving in caves
requires training." 19 July 2006
Comments: None.
of California Santa Barbara. Heavy snows had left only the top
foot of the 4- foot fence exposed. Two of the four broke through
the snow and fell 21 feet into the six foot wide opening to the
vent. The other two patrollers saw them fall and came to help,
but one of them also fell in. The fourth patroller used a rope to
lower himself into the hole but was overcome by gas. Three
other responders arrived and pulled him out and he survived. It
was not determined whether the gas had killed the other three,
the fall, or a combination of both. The gas in the vent was
suspected to be carbon dioxide but was not confirmed. CO2 had
been linked to tree die offs in the area.
The four ski patrollers were hospitalized for CO2 exposure and
recovered.
Brendan Riley, San Diego Union-Tribune, "Mammoth Ski Patrol
members die in fall in volcanic gas vent." 7 April 2006
Brandan Riley, San Diego Union-Tribune, "Poison gas may
have killed ski patrollers." 8 April 2006
Comments: Two of the fatalities had head lacerations. The heat
from the vent probably eroded the snow so it did not support the
weight of the patrollers. The lesson to be learned for cavers is
that the bad air that incapacitates one person will also
incapacitate the rescuer. Be careful!

---------- Page 21 ----------


********** 8 April
Rt 276 Quarry Cliff Face, North Carolina
stranded on rope
Flittermouse Grotto held a vertical training at a quarry face near
Sliding Rock where they had rigged two ropes. Sandy Sherlin
(45) was alone at the top of the 80-foot cliff with the rest at the
bottom when she backed over the lip. She slipped and
instinctively grabbed the rope above the rack with her right
hand. The lip is undercut, wet and slippery with no foot holds
below. This caused her hand to be trapped between the loaded
rope and the rock.
Expressions of pain were relayed to those below, so Scott
McCrea got on the other rope and ascended up next to Sandy
and pulled the rope off Sandy's hand. She was able to complete
the rappel where the group applied ice. Sandy recovered fully.
Scott McCrea, Incident Report, 8 April 2006


********** 21 April
unnamed cave, Tobago
fatality, cause unknown
Shiva, aka "Swami," had been living in the cave some 30 years
and was a well-known character on the island. The cave is
located some 25 feet above sea level on the Arnos Vale coast
and a recon was made after fishermen complained to a security
guard about a stench coming from the cave. Shiva was dead.
The man, who was always a gentleman, had last been seen the
month prior, but had not been looking well.
Jerry Ali, Tobago News, "Cave man Swami' found dead." 21
April 2006


********** 14 July
Two Door Cave, Hawaii
stranded kayakers
A 41-year-old woman and her 15-year-old niece were trapped in
the back of Two Door Cave on the Na Pali Coast while in their
kayaks. Fire rescue crews used personal watercraft to make the
extraction in rough water and then transferred the two women to
an inflatable boat. They only received a few scratches from the
incident.
Advertiser Staff, Honolulu Advertiser, "Kayakers rescued off Na
Pali Coast." 15 July 2006.


********** 12 August
Rusty's Cave, Georgia
dog rescue from pit
Ricky DuPriest (26) and Kirk Wiliams (27) were walking up to
Rusty's Cave when they heard a howl. Ricky rappelled in and
found a dog. It had probably been in the cave about a week as
its ribs were showing through the coat. Ricky harnessed the dog
and Kirk pulled it up. They fed the dog some left-over MREs
and then the dog ran off down the trail. They could not find it
after a brief search.
Ricky DuPriest, Incident Report, 12 August 2006


********** 30 August
unnamed Cave, Kentucky
horse rescue from pit
Ruby, a 1,200- pound Belgian workhorse, fell into a 28 foot
deep cave near Radcliff while grazing. A veterinarian gave her a
muscle relaxer followed by an anesthetic. After 30 minutes of
unconsciousness, she was lifted to safety with a crane. Other
than a minor amount of blood on her legs and muzzle, she was
fine.
unattributed, Courier-Journal, "Horse falls into 28-foot-deep
cave, is pulled to safety by rescuers." 1 September 2006
Comments: I would be concerned about going into a pit with a
1,200 pound potentially injured horse.
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at
www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431

---------- Page 22 ----------
The National Cave Rescue Commission
The National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) is a volunteer
group developed to train cave rescue personnel throughout the
United States. It is part of the National Speleological Society,
located within the Department of the Administrative Vice-
President.
The NCRC does not perform cave rescues. It organizes,
develops, and provides training in cave rescue techniques,
maintains lists of individuals trained in cave rescue, and can help
locate rescue resources in times of need. Most NCRC-trained
cavers do participate in rescues, but not as part of the NCRC.
They work as members of their local rescue teams, civil defense
units, or cave rescue groups.
The NCRC also works to:
Maintain good working relationships with other rescue-
oriented individuals, organizations, government agencies,
and sources of specialized equipment and services (e.g., the
Air Force Rescue Coordination Center and the Center for
Mine Safety and Health Administration).
Maintain current files of potentially useful equipment (e.g.,
underground communications equipment and cave-oriented
medical kits) and services that can be obtained through the
above sources.
Acquire and maintain a limited supply of certain equipment,
such as special rescue litters and vertical rescue gear, in key
locations throughout the country.
Increase the number and proficiency of cave rescuers across
the United States by sponsoring training sessions and
seminars, and by encouraging other caving, rescue, and
EMS organizations to sponsor such educational programs.
Encourage international cooperation by developing contacts
with cave rescuers and rescue agencies in other countries,
by pre-planning with these groups where US involvement is
anticipated, and by inviting participation of cave rescuers
from other countries in NCRC seminars.
Organization
The NCRC is led by a Board of Regional Coordinators which
includes a National Coordinator, Training Coordinator, Medical
Coordinator, and Diving Coordinator (each of whom coordinates
resources and activities at a national level), and Regional
Coordinators for each of ten regions in the United States and its
territories. Board members are nominated by cavers and cave
rescue personnel, and are appointed by the NSS Board of
Governors. The NCRC depends on many volunteers without
official positions whose special knowledge, talents, or contacts
make the network more effective.
Training
The NCRC sponsors a week-long Cave Rescue Operations and
Management Seminar each year that is held in various locations
around the United States. The seminar serves as a "boot camp"
of cave rescue and provides three levels of training. Cave rescue
is constantly evolving, and the most up-to-date techniques are
presented each year. In addition to the annual national week-
long seminar, the NCRC regions sponsor regional week-long
seminars, regional modular seminars (taught over a series of
weekends), courses in small-group and self-rescue techniques,
and weekend cave rescue orientation courses.
NCRC seminars consist of extensive classroom and field work
designed to maximize the learning experience. The seminars
include lectures, demonstrations, and field exercises on
underground environments, vertical rescue, mechanical
advantage systems, extrication techniques, basic medical
principles, communications, and themanagement of cave rescue
operations. Emphasis is placed on practical skills and
techniques, with realistic exercises in a variety of cave
environments.
The seminars provide basic and advanced material for students
who typically include cavers, emergency services personnel, and
emergency managers. During the eight days of a seminar,
students receive about 100 hours of instruction, and are on the
move from early morning well into the evening. The NCRC uses
and teaches the Incident Command System (ICS) used by fire
departments, rescue squads, and other emergency agencies and
services.
Course Listings and Contact Information
Information on NCRC operation, activities, and training,
including contact information for NCRC Coordinators, is
published each year in the NSS Members Manual, and is also
available on the NCRC website at www.ncrc.info. Upcoming
seminars are announced on the web site and in the NSS News.
National Cave Rescue Commission Course
Listing and Contact Information:
www.caves.org/io/nerc
