
---------- Page 1 ----------
NSS N EWS
American Caving Accidents
2011-2012
August 2013

---------- Page 2 ----------
CALENDAR
USA
August 5-9, 2013-NSS Convention, Shippensburg University, Shippensburg,
PA. See NSS2013.com or contact Co-chairs Gordon Birkhimer (birkhimer@
cox.net, (703)573-4653)) or Craig Hindman (CraigHindman@verizon.net,
(410)792-0742).
August 22-25th, 2013-Rescue Technician: Cave Rescue I & Il class taught
by Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit. This the only NFPA 1006 Certified course
in cave rescue in the nation, and is sanctioned by the Alabama Fire College.
The intensive 4-day class covers but is not limited to: operating under an
Incident Command structure, Single Rope Technique, communications
underground, cave-specific medical considerations, patient packaging and
movement within a cave environment, haul and lower systems, vertical
rescue, extrication techniques, and logistics. It is an extremely hands-on
course with many field exercises including a full-on mock rescue.
Location: Union Grove, AL. Cost: $50 for the standard course (typical for
most cavers), $295 if taken for certification (requires prerequisites). Both
courses are identical and taught simultaneously except for the certification
test on Monday for those requiring it. For more information visit www.hcru.
org/rescueclass or call (256) 763-0073 or e-mail info@hcru.org
August 24th, 2013-Dogwood City Grotto 50th Anniversary Celebration.
The Dogwood City Grotto will be hosting it's 50th Anniversary Celebration
at the Tellus Science Museum. Come join us for a night of dinner and
unrestricted access to all of the amenities of the Tellus Science Museum.
Enjoy dinner, drinks, planetarium view, and all exhibits for only $35. Semi-
formal attire is required. Please call or email Joe Abbott at 770-445-4220
or joeabbott@mindspring.com for tickets.
Sept 7-8, 2013-Single Rope Technique, taught by the Huntsville Cave
Rescue Unit. Designed to instruct students in the knowledge and skills to
safely climb and rappel using SRT with hands-on training in both classroom
and field settings. Perfect for beginners, as a refresher course, or to work
on your rigging skills! Course is limited to 20 participants so reserve your
spot now at http://www.hcru.org/srt
September 23-27, 2013- Lint Camp at Carlsbad Cavern, Info: contact
Pat Jablonsky patjabo@hotmail.com or 970-874-8979
September 27-29, 2013-Nittany Grotto is hosting the Fall MAR field meet
at Lincoln Caverns Campground near Huntingdon,Pa.Registration form and
more information can be found on the MAR website.
October 10-13, 2013-36th Annual TAG Fall Cave-In celebrating the
Dogwood City Grotto's 50th Anniversary, and our 10th year on Lookout
Mountain. Registration is open online at tagfallcavein.org. Save $10 by
registering before September 1st. For information, contact Patty Springer
at 423.619.2041, pitpatty@att.net. Vendors can contact Darien Dopp at
770.301.8228, kvcrawler@yahoo.com. Follow the TAG Fall Cave-In on
Facebook for up to the minute planning and events.
October 17-20, 2013-6th Annual Texas Caver's Reunion at Paradise
Canyon in Rio Medina, TX. Contact: Don@oztotl.com
November 4-8, 2013-The 2013 National Cave and Karst Management
Symposium ("A Changing Climate") will be held in Carlsbad, NM Registration
for the 2013 NCKMS is now open! Visit http://nckms2013.businesscatalyst.
com/ for more information and to register.
FOREIGN
March 15-22, 2014-16th International Symposium on Vulcanospeleology,
Galápagos Islands. Pre-symposium caving or scuba diving March 10-15,
2014; Post-symposium caving March 22-29, 2014
FROM THE EDITOR
Dear Members,
As many of you may know the NSS has been facing a budget
shortfall and it looked like the ACA that Bonny Armstrong had just
prepared was going to be relegated to a "digital only" printing. Since
I was somewhat short on material for the regular NSS News, I offered
to include the material as part of one of our regular issues. So instead
of being a "Part 2" issue, this issue of the News includes both our
regular columns and the ACA material.
Dave Bunnell
Send items for the calendar to davebunnell@comcast.net at least 6 weeks before
desired month of publication (i.e., by March 15 for the May issue).
American Caving Accidents
2011 2012
American Caving Accidents Editor
Bonny Armstrong
110 Timber Lakes Estates
Heber City, Utah
aca@caves.org
American Caving Accidents 2011- 2012
Review Committee
Andy Armstrong
Jeff Bartlett
Richard Breisch
George Dasher
Yvonne Droms
Ray Keeler
Mark Minton
Stephen Mosberg
Rene Ohms
Forrest Wilson
Webmaster: Kyle Gochenour
Below: NCRC students participate in a mock rescue.

---------- Page 3 ----------
POSTMASTERS OR MEMBERS:
Send address changes to National Speleological
Society, 2813 Cave Ave., Huntsville, AL 35810-4431.
NSS EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
President
Wm Shrewsbury
124 4th Ave NW
Largo, FL 33770
president@caves.org
FEATURE ARTICLES
(727) 424-2901
Administrative VP
Operations VP
David Luckins
Geary Schindel
3683 Oakleaf Drive
11310 Whisper Dawn
Special Issue: American Caving Accidents
San Antonio, TX 78230
W. Bloomfield, MI 48324
(210) 479-2151
(248) 520-6161 (cell)
avp@caves.org
ovp@caves.org
From the ACA Editor
Executive VP
Secretary/Treasurer
Bob Vandeventer
Debra Young
Bonny Armstrong
551 Homestead Ave. NE
525 Lawndale Dr.
Greenwood IN 46142-3904
Palm Bay, FL 32907
(321) 984-0228
(317) 625-3592
s-t@caves.org
Description of Incident Results and Types
evp@caves.org
National Speleological Society Office
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics, 1986 - 2012
2813 Cave Ave, Huntsville, AL 35810-4431
Tel: (256) 852-1300; FAX (256) 851-9241
e-mail: nss@caves.org; Web site: www.caves.org
Variable Friction: How to Use the Greatest Feature of a Rappel
Please contact the office for address changes or back issues.
Rack
Scott McCrea
Dave Bunnell
Box 879
Angels Camp, CA 95222
2011 - 2012 List of Reported Incidents
davebunnell@comcast.net
Please include "NSS News" in your subject line when e-mailing
2011 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
material to help me sort it from the spam. Thanks!
Questions about submitting features and photos? Please see the style
and submission guidelines:on the NSS web site:
2011 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
www.caves.org/pub/nssnews/style.html
ADVERTISING
2011 Caving-Related Accident and Incident Reports
Complete advertising information, including ad costs, deadlines, and
guidelines for preparation, are on the NSS wesite at: www.caves.org/
pub/nssnews/ads.html. Contact the editor if you wish to place an ad.
2012 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Payments for ads should be sent to the NSS office. New advertisers
are expected to pay for ads prior to publication.
2012 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
DEPARTMENT EDITORS
2012 Caving-Related Accident and Incident Reports
CONSERVATION
NEWSLETTER REVIEW
Jim & Val Hildreth-Werker
Kelly Smallwood
331 Mountain View Circle
Previously Unreported Caving Incidents
PO Box 207
Hillsboro, NM 88042-0207
Jasper, TN 37347
(575) 895-5050
rowland7840@bellsouth.net
werks@cunacueva.com
Previously Unreported Caving-Related Incidents
SPELEAN SPOTLIGHT
UNDERGROUND ONLINE
Ron Zuber
Buford Pruitt, Jr.
ronzuber@comcast.net
PO Box 526
Mclntosh, FL 32664
CAVE CHRONICLES
bpruitt570@gmail.com
Philip Rykwalder
phillip@cavenow.com
DEPARTMENTS
Deadline: Ads, articles and announcements
should be sent to the editor by the 15th of the
Letters
month, six weeks before the month of issue
(e.g., material for the March issue needs to
Classified Ads
be in by January 15).
President's Message
The NSS News (ISSN 0027-7010) is
published monthly with the Members Manual
Underground Update
and American Caving Accidents published as
Scan to connect
additional issues by the National Speleological
to caves.org
Society, Inc, 2813 Cave Ave, Huntsville, AL
35810-4431. Periodicals Postage Paid at
Huntsville, Al and additional mailing offices. Tel: (256)852-1300; FAX
(256)851-9241, e-mail: nss@caves.org, web: www.caves.org
ABOUT THE COVER
Regular membership in the NSS is $40 per year. See http://caves.
org/info/membertypes.shtml for descriptions of other membership
categories. Subscriptions to the NSS News are $27 per year; individual
copies are $3.00 each. Contact the Huntsville office for membership
applications, subscriptions, orders, or for replacement of issues missing
Our cover photo was taken by Jansen Cardy during the 2012 NCRC weeklong
or damaged in the mail. Moving? Please report changes of address to
seminar mock rescue in Pettijohn Cave in Walker County, GA. It shows an elaborate
the office promptly or online at: www.caves.org/info/changeinfo.shtml
highline system in action. The mock 'patient' wrapped in the brown tarp with red and
Copyright ©2013
green webbing restraints is Instructor Qualification (IQ) class student (now NCRC
by the National Speleological Society, Inc.
instructor) Thomas Evans from Bozeman, Montana.
August 2013
Volume 71 Number 8
2011 - 2012
Underground Online
Cave Chronicles
Reading
Society News
FRONT COVER:

---------- Page 4 ----------
"Our passion for learning is our tool for survival." Carl Sagan
From the ACA Editor
Welcome to another issue of American Caving Accidents (ACA), a spe-
cial publication of the National Speleological Society (NSS). Since 1967,
ACA has served as the journal of record for caving accidents in North
America. The purpose of collecting and reporting caving accidents and
incidents is to help cavers educate themselves on the hazards of caving
based on real-life incidents. These incidents, when reported accurately
and in detail, should ultimately help readers become safer cavers by
learning through others' experiences.
Reports are collected through submissions by cavers involved in the
incident or rescue, or who otherwise have some creditable knowledge
of the event. Caving incidents brought to the attention of ACA by media
reports are verified for accuracy by contacting involved parties directly
when possible.
To this end, I cannot emphasize enough the value of cavers submit-
ting incident reports to ACA. We have all shared stories of our caving
mishaps around a campfire; let us please share them with the caving
community. It may just save someone's life.
Long-time readers of ACA will likely notice in this issue an absence of
the term "spelunker" (except when quoting from a report). Over the
years, spelunken has come to represent a person who is inexperienced
and often ill-equipped for cave exploration. While it is fun to say "cav-
ers rescue spelunkers," it is important to remember that, on occa-
sion, spelunkers have in fact rescued cavers. If we can instead think of
people with flashlights and tennis shoes as novice cavers, we might just
be more likely to bring them into the fold, invite them to a grotto meet-
ing, and teach them safe and conservation-minded caving techniques.
Every so-called spelunker has the potential to be a future NSS member.
As with previous issues, caving reports have been divided into two
categories: regular caving and cave diving. These categories are further
classified by incident result or outcome, and incident type (causes and
contributing factors).
Some reported incidents are placed in a separate category called
caving-related. These include incidents where a person needed rescu-
ing from a cave they did not intend to enter, incidents that occur on the
way to or from a cave, an animal needing rescue from a cave, or other
unusual circumstances. Since these incidents did not occur during nor-
mal caving activities, but required caving gear, cave-rescue techniques,
or cavers to effect a rescue, they are considered caving-related. Caving-
related incidents are not included in the statistics.
Table 1 shows NSS membership numbers versus total number of re-
ported incidents. Not all incidents are reported to ACA, and not all cav-
ers are members of the NSS. These totals, therefore, are not intended
to be considered reliable indicators of accident rates and should not be
used to draw conclusions about the relative degree of risk or danger
involved in caving.
This issue would not have been possible without assistance from many
individuals. I am very fortunate to have a review committee made up
of cavers with expertise in many areas. Andy Armstrong, Jeff Bartlett,
Richard Breisch, George Dasher, and Yvonne Droms meticulously
edited the reports and offered invaluable suggestions. Mark Minton
researched, translated, and summarized the reports from Mexico. Dr.
Stephen Mosberg and Forrest Wilson served as medical and diving
consultants respectively. Rene Ohms assisted with researching report
locations to create the incident maps, and Kyle Gochenour main-
tained and updated the ACA website. Out-going editor Ray Keeler was
extremely supportive in my transition to editor, and I am grateful for his
assistance.
I'd like to thank everyone who submitted incident reports for this issue
and took the time to answer many follow-up questions. In particular,
Anmar Mirza and Brad Tipton submitted several detailed reports. Bill
Putnam, Buford Pruitt, Kelly Smallwood, and Chuck Porter informed
ACA of many incidents that were not otherwise reported. Art Palmer
and Jim Coke were very gracious in supplying details of caves and cav-
ing areas during the research of many incidents. Thank you to Scott
McCrea for contributing the feature article. Finally, I would like to thank
Wm Shrewsbury, Bob Vandeventer, and especially Dave Bunnell for as-
sistance in bringing this issue to print.
Bonny Armstrong
NSS 43003RL
Heber City, Utah
NSS Membership and
Number of Incidents
Year
Members
Incidents
Only incidents resulting in aid, injury, or fatality
are included. Membership figures include all
classes of membership.
Table 1. NSS membership VS. incidents.

---------- Page 5 ----------
Description of Incident Results and Types
DESCRIPTION OF INCIDENT RESULTS
Fatalities - Fatalities from caving are relatively uncommon, on aver-
age about three per year. Although these tend to be inexperienced,
ill-equipped persons, experienced cavers are not exempt.
Injury and Aid - Injury and aid covers incidents where one or more per-
sons were injured who then needed the help of others, besides those
in their caving party, to exit the cave.
Aid No Injury - Reports of an uninjured caver, or cavers, requiring as-
sistance from persons other than those in their caving party to exit the
cave, are placed in this category.
Injury, No Aid - These incidents result in injuries ranging from cuts and
bruises to broken bones. The injured person was able to exit the cave
either unaided, or with assistance from their caving companions. Since
no outside assistance was brought in to help, these incidents are also
called self-rescues or small-party rescues.
No Consequence - Incidents of no consequence are usually near-miss-
es, involve problems underground that could have led to a different
outcome but were resolved by the parties involved, involve animals
needing rescue, or do not otherwise fit into the other categories. They
are presented here to familiarize readers with the many things that can
go wrong while caving, and often offer good examples of successful
self-rescues or small-party rescues.
DESCRIPTION OF INCIDENT TYPES
Acetylene-related - Acetylene-related incidents were more common in
the 1960s and 1970s than during the last few decades. No acetylene-
related incidents have been reported since 1996, probably because
relatively inexpensive yet very bright LED lights are now favored among
the majority of American cavers.
Bad Air - There were no incidents involving bad air reported for this is-
sue, although rescuers at Wye Cave and the 2012 Glade Cave incidents
monitored the cave atmosphere as a precaution. Encountering bad
air in caves may be a rare occurrence, but those occurrences can be
deadly. In past reports, the presence of bad air in caves has been from
biological decomposition, poor air exchange, carbon monoxide from
fires, blasting fumes, chemicals being washed into the cave, and kids
setting off smoke bombs.
Caver Fall - Caver falls continue to constitute a large proportion of cav-
ing accidents. For simplicity, any falls by any person in a cave, regard-
less of their experience, are considered a caver fall. In this issue, there
are fifteen reports of people falling while on a caving trip and three
people accidentally fell into a pit or cave that they had not intended to
enter. In most cases, the falls could be attributed to inexperience and
improper footwear.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder - The category of difficulty on rope or lad-
der was added to ACA in 1994 to encompass a variety of problems that
may prevent a caver from being unable to ascend or descend a rope or
ladder. In this issue are two reports involving three persons who expe-
rienced difficulty on rope and one report of a youth who had trouble
climbing a cable ladder. Unfortunately, one incident in 2011 resulted in
two fatalities.
Drowning - There were no drowning incidents in 2011 or 2012. The
December 2011 incident is technically a "near drowning" since the
patient was revived.
Equipment Problem - No incidents in 2011 or 2012 were attributed to
equipment problems.
Exhaustion - There are no reports of exhaustion being the key factor
leading to a caving incident in this issue. Two brothers, however, found
themselves to be too exhausted to go back through Ape Cave after
completing a through-trip. They were eventually aided by hikers in the
area.
Flooding - Nine people were on a guided, off-trail tour of Hidden River
Cave when a significant rainstorm caused the river in the cave to begin
rising rapidly. Hidden River Cave staff found the group, and brought
them out. In New York, a family needed rescuing when a storm drain
they had entered began filling with water in response to a storm. It
is important to get a good reliable forecast before entering a cave,
especially one to have a known flood potential. Check the forecast of
surrounding areas as well and consider the weather from a few days
previous; some caves suddenly flood several days after a rain event.
Hypothermia - Hypothermia is often a secondary result in caving
incidents following a caver being stuck, injured, or stranded in a cave.
It is especially dangerous not only because of the physiological aspects,
but because it impairs judgment, which can lead to mistakes and other
accidents.
Illness/Medical Issue - There are three incidents of persons becoming
seriously ill during caving trips. One caver suffered a stroke as he was
exiting Cahuilla Creek Caves. A visitor to Mammoth Cave suffered a fa-
tal heart attack while on a public tour. Another person, this one visiting
Southport Saltpeter (Millers) Cave, had a stroke during a guided tour.
After attending a week-long National Cave Rescue Commission train-
ing in Puerto Rico, 21 students reported symptoms of fatigue, cough,
general malaise (tiredness and weakness), and/or body aches. Five
of the students developed severe pulmonary symptoms and/or were
diagnosed with histoplasmosis.
Lost There are three reports in this issue of people becoming lost.
Each incident occurred in a large, complex cave and was resolved
relatively quickly due to the fact that each party had a reliable surface
watch. A surface watch is a person (or persons) who knows where you
are going and what time you are expected to return. In the case of a
caving party missing their "out time," the surface watch should also
know who to contact.
Lost Control on Rappel - A new incident-type category has been added,
beginning with this issue, to cover incidents of persons losing control
while on rappel. In previous issues, these incidents were listed under
Caver Falls or Difficulty on Rope. While most out-of-control rappels do
result in a caver fall, the contributing factor or cause is very different
than those typical for caver falls, such as slipping or climbing without
a belay. Losing control on rappel does not fit into the Difficulty on
Rope category either, as this category was created to encompass "such
problems as becoming stuck at the lip of a pit, clothing or hair caught in
the rappel device, jammed rappel safety, or simply becoming unable to
ascend or descend."
Between the years 1986 and 2010, twenty-five incidents of persons
losing control on rappel were reported. These incidents resulted in no
injuries to severe injuries and include four fatalities. Rope burns, espe-

---------- Page 6 ----------
cially to the hands, and broken ankles were the most common reported
injuries. The causes were varied, and sometimes unknown, but include
removing too many bars from a rappel rack, rigging the carabiner
brake bar or rack incorrectly, not tying off properly and losing control
while passing a knot or adjusting a rope pad, becoming detached from
the rope, being struck by a falling rock, not wearing gloves, and other
reasons.
This issue presents four incidents of cavers losing control on rappel.
Rock fall - Three incidents from rock fall are reported in this issue with
injuries including a broken finger and mild head trauma, a broken toe,
and severe contusions. Each incident was the result of cavers coming
into contact with unstable rocks in non-virgin passages. These reports
should serve as a reminder that loose rocks can exist even in caves that
receive high visitation.
Stuck - Six people required aid when they became stuck in tight cave
passages, one in 2011, the others in 2012. The incidents at Stay High
Cave, Schetromph Cave, and Wye Cave (where two people became
stuck) required lengthy and difficult rescues.
Trapped or Stranded The four reported incidents of persons becom-
ing stranded occurred as a result of those persons descending a pit or
falling into a hole and being unable to climb back out.
CAVING ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT STATISTICS
1986 - 2012
Result of Incident
Result
Fatality
Injury and Aid
Aid, No Injury
Injury, No Aid
No Consequence
Total
Incident Type
Type
Caver Fall
Trapped/Stranded
Difficulty on Rope
Rock Fall
Lost
Flooding
Hypothermia
Illness
Exhaustion
Drowning
Stuck
Bad Air
Acetylene-related
Equipment
Other
Lost Control on Rappel
Caving-related
10201 152 11294199
Incidents
Cave Diving Incidents
Result
Fatality
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Consequence
Total
Other This catch-all category includes incidents that don't quite fit
in other categories. Examples in this issue include cavers that were
overdue for unknown reasons in the Bone-Norman Cave System, a
reoccurring knee problem also in the Bone-Norman System, a near-
drowning in an Illinois cave, two intoxicated persons being helped out
of Clarksville Cave, and a finger injury in a Virginia cave.
1Bill Putnam, NSS News American Caving Accidents, Part 2, Volume 55,
Number 12, December 1997.
Report accidents and incidents via the internet:
www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431

---------- Page 7 ----------
2011 Caving Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
= 2 incidents in same area
2012 Caving Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
= 2 incidents in same area

---------- Page 8 ----------
Variable Friction: How to use the greatest feature of a rappel rack
Scott McCrea NSS 40839RL
Out-of-control rappels, feeding rope,
the versatility and adjustment options of a
frustration, and exhaustion are possible
standard rack.
results of improper rappel rack use. The
Rappel racks create friction in two ways.
friction between a rack and a rope varies
First, with surface contact between the rope
throughout a rappel and needs to be adjusted
and the bars. Second, with the bending of
in order to control a rappeller's speed. Rope
the rope around the bars.
length, diameter, construction, materials,
There are three ways to vary the friction
condition, and age are a few of the ways the
with a rack.
rope can affect the friction. The angle of the
1. Increase or decrease bar spacing.
descent and pack weight also require adjust-
2. Adjust the rope entry angle.
ments. Variable friction makes it possible to
3. Drop or add bars.
use a rack on drops of nearly any length.
Bar spacing refers to the amount of
Investigations have shown that improper
space between the bars. Squeezing the bars
friction variation and control has contributed
together creates less space and more friction,
to many rappelling accidents. Feeding
slowing a rappeller's speed. Spreading the
rope, or pushing rope into the rack, is one
bars apart creates more space and less fric-
improper technique. This will reduce the
tion, increasing speed. Adjusting the space
friction and allow the rack to move, but, it
between the bottom two or three bars is the
can be difficult and result in exhaustion and
most effective technique for varying friction
frustration which leads to bad decisions.
(Figure 2). Only the last two bars need to be
A bar accidentally getting pushed off or
spread or squeezed. Trying to spread the
dropped is also a dangerous possibility when
bars above is difficult and they quickly slide
feeding rope.
back up to where they were. Always adjust
For clarity, this article will feature the
bar spacing before and after making other
standard, 14-inch, six-bar, "J"-shaped rappel
changes such as the rope entry angle or
rack (Figure 1) oriented perpendicularly to
dropping/adding bars.
the body.
Rope entry angle adjustments vary
Figure 8s, ATCs, bobbins, micro-racks,
how much of the rope touches the last bar.
"U"-shaped racks, and other rappel devices
The angle can be adjusted SO the rope only
offer either non-variable (static) friction or
touches a tiny part of the bar or touches/
limited variable friction. These devices work
wraps around the full bar. This variation is
great in certain situations, but do not have
usually done by moving the rope to the left or
right, which will change the entry angle and
add or remove a half-bar of friction on the
last bar (Figure 3). Placing the rope between
the rappeller's legs will also adjust the rope
entry angle.
Dropping bars is done by unclipping the
Frame
last bar and sliding it all the way down the
long leg of the rack. Dropping bars should be
Bars
done SO that only a half-bar worth of friction
is removed. For example, bars should only
be dropped if the rope is only touching the
Short
top half of the bar instead of wrapping all the
way around the full bar. Dropping full bars
Leg
Long
can reduce the available friction by not just
Side
one bar, but by 11/2 bars. For example, if a
Leg
rack is rigged with six full bars and the sixth
Side
bar is removed, the available friction instantly
Nut
decreases to 41/2 bars (Figure 4).
To reduce friction, follow these steps in
order, one at a time, until the desired amount
of friction is reached.
1. Spread bars.
2. Adjust rope-entry angle by moving
Eye
rope to other side of the rack.
3. Spread bars.
Opening
4. Remove last bar.
5. Start over at 1.
Figure 1. A standard 14-inch, 6-bar, "J"-
shaped rack. Note: this rack is oriented
When more friction is needed, adjust
parallel to the viewer.
the entry angle for more contact with the
Nate Waybright at Whiteside Mtn in NC.
last bar, or add a bar.
Ideally, friction should be adjusted SO
that the last bar needs to be spread and
held down to maintain the optimum speed.
In addition to a smooth ride, this technique
can provide a safety function. If the bar being
held down is released, it should automatically
get pulled up, squeezing the bars together
and slowing the speed.
As a rule of thumb, never rappel with
less than four bars. If four bars is too much
friction, this is the cave gods telling you
Squeezed
Spread
Figure 2. Squeezing the bars together creates
more friction, spreading them creates less
friction.

---------- Page 9 ----------
1/2
Full


********** 6 bars
Figure 3. Adjusting the rope entry angle will
Figure 4. Removing the bottom bar of a 6-bar
add or subtract a half-bar's worth of friction.
rack reduces the friction to an equivalent of
This is much easier to do on a rack oriented
4 1/2 bars.
perpendicularly to the rappeller, as shown
here.
something is wrong. Stop and figure out
what it is or go home.
Gripping the rope with the off-rack
hand, pulling the rope around the hip, and
a bottom belay are a few of the methods
that can affect the friction from outside the
rack. Using them does not take advantage of
the variable friction feature of a rack. These,
and similar methods come at the cost of
efficiency. And, depending on the situation,
they may not always be an available option.
The most efficient way to take advantage
of a rack's options is to orient it perpendicu-
larly to the rappeller's body-looking at the
ends of the bars with the short leg away. This
makes it possible to easily move the rope to
adjust rope entry angles and drop or add bars
(see Figure 3). "J"- shaped rack frames are
available with either a straight or twisted (90°)
eye to accommodate different style harnesses
(Figure 5). Most caving harnesses are best
coupled with a twisted-eye rack.
"U" shaped racks only offer limited
variable friction. The bars can be spread and
squeezed but dropping bars can be danger-
ous. Because the rope is trapped in the "U",
dropping a bar can result in the loss of 11/2
bars of friction. This is a huge jump in the
amount of friction available and can easily
lead to problems.
Rappel racks are the most versatile
descending device ever created. They have
Starting a rappel into Hoya de la Luz in Mexico. The versatility of a rack is key to descending
been successfully used on drops from 4 to
drops such as this, where the extra friction afforded by the rope weight changes sigificantly as
4000 feet. They are infinitely adjustable
one descends. The low side drop shown here is 125m and the high side is 188m.
when used efficiently and properly.
Twisted
Eye
Straight
Eye
41/2 bars
Figure 5. The two types of shaped rack
frames.

---------- Page 10 ----------
2011 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 01
Letson Plunge
Indiana
January 15
Neversink
Alabama
February 5
Cahuilla Creek Caves
California
February 11
Stay High Cave
Virginia
February 12
Ellisons Cave
Georgia
February 15
Rustys Cave
Georgia
March 13
Enchanted Rock Cave
Texas
March 26
Neffs Cave
Utah
May 29
Sinking Cove Cave
Tennessee
June 11
unspecified cave
Alabama
July 14
Bone-Norman Cave System
West Virginia
July 17
Worleys (Morrill) Cave
Tennessee
July 30
Spanish Moss Cave
Utah
August 1
Glade Cave
Virginia
August 6
Worleys (Morrill) Cave
Tennessee
September 4
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
September 17
Bone-Norman Cave System
West Virginia
October 1
Wind Cave
Kentucky
October 16
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave
Wyoming
November 12
Peppersauce Cave
Arizona
December 1
Buckner Cave
Indiana
December 3
unspecified cave
Illinois
December 13
Smiths Crack
Idaho
December 31
Sótano de las Guaguas
San Luis Potosí, Mexico
* not included in statistics
2011 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 31
Eagles Nest
Florida
April 17
Chassahowitzka River
Florida
June 9
Devils Eye Spring
Florida
June 11
Whiskey Still Sink
Florida
October 16
Sistema Cocodrilo
Quintana Roo, Mexico
2011 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
date unknown
unspecified lava tube
Hawaii
January 3
unnamed pit
San Luis Potosí, Mexico
January 20
Carter Memorial Wayside Caves
Virginia
March 5
Ellenville Fault Ice Caves
New York
March 14
Ape Cave
Washington
March 30
unspecified cave
Kentucky
April
multiple caves
Puerto Rico
May 2
unspecified sea cave
California
June 5
Sistema del Rio Camuy
Puerto Rico
2012 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 2
Poleta Cave
California
January 8
Bone-Norman Cave System
West Virginia
January 14
Clarksville Cave
New York
January 24
Schetromph Cave
Maryland
March 1
Hidden River Cave
Kentucky
March 24
Crystal Ice Cave
California
March 31
unspecified cave
Virginia
April 7
Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
rockfall
injury, no aid
lost control on rappel
aid, no injury
illness
injury and aid
stuck
two fatalities
difficulty on rope (2 people)
aid, no injury
stranded, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
stranded
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
lost control on rappel
injury and aid
caver fall
no consequence
other, overdue
injury and aid
caver fall
no consequence
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
illness
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
lost
injury, no aid
other, medical issue
injury and aid*
caver fall*
aid, no injury
lost
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
other near drowning
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
lost control on rappel
Result
Incident Type
fatality
medical issue, died at hospital
fatality
drowning
fatality
medical
fatality
drowning
fatality
bad gas mixture
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
fell into lava tube
aid, no injury
fell into pit
no consequence
infant found dead
aid, no injury
2 people fell into cave
injury and aid
exhausted, hypothermic
no consequence
dog stranded in cave
no consequence
illness, histoplamosis
no consequence
body found in cave
fatality
drowning, washed into cave
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
stranded
aid, no injury
lost
aid, no injury
other, intoxicated
aid, no injury
stuck
aid, no injury
flooding
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
other, caught finger on rock projection
injury and aid
caver fall

---------- Page 11 ----------
April 8
Hidden Cave
California
April 13
Jewel Cave
South Dakota
May 5
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
May 9
Mammoth Cave
Kentucky
May 18
Wye Cave
lowa
May 19
unspecified cave
Pennsylvania
May 28
Thunder Canyon Cave
California
June 9
Shoveleater-Hellhole Cave System
West Virginia
July 14
Sinking Cove Cave
Tennessee
July 16
Glade Cave
Virginia
September 11
Southport Saltpeter (Millers) Cave
Tennessee
November 8
Kaumana Cave
Hawaii
November 11
Pachidream Cave
BC, Canada
November 12
Climax Cave
Georgia
November 18
Pettijohns Cave
Georgia
December 1
Fricks Cave
Georgia
2012 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
February 15
Merritts Mill Pond
Florida
March 17
Vortex Spring
Florida
March 18
Devil's Eye Spring
Florida
March 31
Weeki Wachee Springs
Florida
April 19
Sistema Chac Mool
Quintana Roo, Mexico
July 21
Big Blue Spring
Florida
August 7
Twin Caves
Florida
October 15
Blue Springs
Florida
2012 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
February 4
dirt cave
California
February 5
Breathing Hole Cave
Indiana
April 19
unspecified cave
Arizona
May 13
sinkhole
Indiana
May 23
Fools Crawl
New York
May 23
sinkhole
New York
May 30
unspecified cave
Tennessee
June 16
Whipple Cave
Nevada
June 24
Secret Caverns
New York
August 14
storm drain
New York
August 19
Atlalaquia de Atikpak
Puebla, Mexico
December 1
Double Sinks
New Mexico
Previously Unreported Caving Incidents
Date
Cave
Location


********** 19 May 1985
Schoharie Caverns
New York
Cueva del Viento
Puerto Rico


********** 10 November 2007
Candlelight Cave
Utah


********** 30 August 2009
Whipple Cave
Nevada


********** 13 March 2010
Grutas de la Puente
San Luis Potosí, Mexico


********** 28 March 2010
Sótano del Popoca
Veracruz, Mexico


********** 14 July 2010
Burroughs Cave
New York
Previously Unreported Caving-related Incidents
Date
Cave
Location


********** 23 October 2009
unnamed pit
Veracruz, Mexico
fatality
trapped
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rockfall
fatality
illness
aid, no injury
stuck (two people)
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope/ladder
no consequence
stranded
injury, no aid
rockfall
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
stuck
aid, no injury
illness
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
lost control on rappel
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
stuck (2 people)
fatality
unknown
fatality
unknown
fatality
medical issue


********** 3 fatalities
drowning
fatality
stuck, drowning
aid, no injury
lost
aid, no injury
lost, out of air, stranded
Result
Incident Type
fatality
trapped by collapse
fatality
suicide
injury, aid
fell hiking to cave
no consequence
dog fell into sinkhole
no consequence
dog stranded in cave
no consequence
calf stranded in sinkhole
no consequence
dog stranded in cave
aid, no injury
cavers assist rock climber
no consequence
fawn stranded in cave
aid, no injury
flooding
fatality
drowning, body recovery
no consequence
murder victim found in cave
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
equipment problem, stranded
no consequence
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope
injury, no aid
other, falling object
aid, no injury
stranded
aid, no injury
lost
Result
Incident Type
fatality
fell into pit

---------- Page 12 ----------
2011 Caving Accidents and Incidents


********** 1 January
Letson Plunge, Indiana
rockfall, injury, no aid
On New Year's Day, Chris Bell (27), Damian Schmeltz, Ryan Cox, and
Kirsten Schmeltz arrived at Letson Plunge, the first of several pits the
group planned to visit that day. Bell rigged the 60-foot entrance drop and
rappelled, followed by Damian. The two found a place out of the presumed
rockfall zone and Bell began getting ready to take photographs of the
others as they rappelled. The next caver on rope, still near the top of the
pit, stood on a ledge that suddenly collapsed. Bell and Damian instinctively
took cover along the nearest wall when they heard rocks falling. Bell
grabbed his helmet to protect the sides of his face, just before being hit
by a basketball-size rock. When the commotion died down, he was left
with a badly bruised left hand, a severely broken finger, some cuts, and a
mild head trauma. Although the pair had moved into an adjacent dome,
rocks falling down the narrow main drop had bounced through a window
and into the area where the two were waiting. They yelled for the other
two to stay up top and then both climbed out without further incident.
1. Chris Bell, Incident Report, 6 January 2011.
Comments: Bell reports that he is grateful that he and his compan-
ions always wear helmets and other appropriate gear when caving, but
in retrospect should have paid closer attention to the rockfall zone. This
incident illustrates the importance of knowing where the rockfall zone
is and staying well clear of it, even if it means not getting the perfect
photograph. Remember, even small rocks can become deadly when fall-
ing down a pit.


********** 15 January
Neversink, Alabama
lost control on rappel, injury, no aid
Brad Barker (26) and Isaiah Lake arrived at Neversink to find the area
blanketed in fresh snow. After double-checking each other's gear, they
rigged a safety line down the snowy slope to the pit where Barker rigged
the mainline. After clearing snow from the lip and positioning a rope pad,
he fully rigged his 6-bar rack to the main line.
The amount of friction made it difficult to move so Barker removed
one bar. As he began to negotiate the lip, his feet slipped on the icy rocks
and he lost contact with the wall. Barker found himself now rappelling
out of control with only three bars engaged. He tried squeezing the bars
together, grabbing the rope with both hands below the rack, and a leg
wrap. These actions slowed his descent only a bit. With the floor of the
pit fast approaching, he prepared for impact by trying to relax so as not
to "hit in a tensed stance." He rolled as he hit the ground, striking a log
with his back. Barker did a self-assessment and called, "Off rope!" Lake
then rappelled down to him.
After much consideration, Barker decided he could climb out under
his own power using his Ropewalker system. As he climbed, he made a
conscious effort to keep his back as straight as possible When he reached
the top, he encountered three members of the Chattanooga Grotto who
were able to offer assistance: Marty Brown, a firefighter and paramedic;
Homero Rivas, a physiatrist at a spine center; and Ralph Powers. Brown
did a trauma assessment and, although he did not find any obvious
injuries, he knew the potential was there. Rivas checked for spinal cord
damage by performing a few neurological tests. Barker seemed to check
out alright, other than his big toe being numb, but this may have been
due to the fact that he was wearing tennis shoes and his feet were wet.
Barker was helped down the trail to the parking lot, where the others
helped him change into dry clothes. By this point, Barker, who thought
he just needed to go home and take some Advil®, decided to take Brown
and Rivas's advice and see a doctor immediately. Lake drove Barker to the
hospital in Scottsboro, but he was transferred to Floyd Medical Center in
Rome, Georgia. He was diagnosed with an L1 compression fracture and
underwent surgery the next morning to have five discs fused. He remained
in the hospital for ten days and was back to work in four weeks.
1. Brad Barker, Incident Report, 13 February 2012.
2. Marty Brown, email communication, 23 April 2012.
Comments: The motivation to self-rescue can be strong, but spinal
injury and pelvic fractures must be considered in ALL persons who sustain
a fall. Ill-considered movement of these patients can result in catastrophic
spinal cord injury or, in the case of pelvic fractures, internal bleeding.
Obviously, patients in otherwise life-threatening circumstances, such as
lying face down in the water, must be moved to a safer position. Careful
weighing of the risk versus benefit must take place before a patient is
moved.
Barker is extremely lucky to have survived an out-of-control rappel of
160 feet. With a full-size, six-bar rack, it is not uncommon to remove one
or two bars to reduce friction. How he ended up on only three bars is still
a mystery but may have been due to creating a loop of rope while feeding
the rack, allowing the fourth bar to come off; or the rack frame may have
squeezed together when it contacted the lip during his slip. Even though
he received six rope burns on his hands, Barker credits his survival largely
to his heavy-duty PMI rappel gloves with reinforced leather palms: "If I
had been wearing cheaper gloves, or wearing non-leather gloves, | would
not have been able to maintain my grip on the rope." More appropriate
footwear may have prevented him from slipping in the first place.


********** 5 February
Cahuilla Creek Caves, California
illness, aid, no injury
Seven members of the San Diego Grotto planned to spend a day
exploring boulder caves known collectively as the Cahuilla Creek Caves.
After an hour of exploration, three people left the cave (and the area)
while the remaining four decided to exit the cave and have lunch before
exploring other caves. Jim Ness (61) was making his way out of the cave
when he collapsed in the entrance area. Brent Colvin, Doug Watson, and
Rich Breisch went to his aid and found he was having trouble moving his
right leg and arm. Since the cave is wet, none of the cavers had brought
a cell phone. Colvin climbed out of the rugged canyon and was able to
find a house where a woman let him call 911. Firefighters from Riverside
County Fire Departments arrived within 45 minutes. A helicopter lifted
Ness and a firefighter out of the canyon at 1:30 p.m. Ness was transferred
to another helicopter and flown to a local hospital. He spent several
months at Sharp Memorial Hospital Rehabilitation Center in San Diego
recovering from a major stroke.
1. Tony Perry, "Downed hiker, 61, rescued in Riverside County by helicop-
ter," Los Angeles Times, 5 February 2011.
2. Rich Breisch, Incident Report, 25 February 2011.
Comments: Breisch notes, "Had his stroke occurred five minutes
earlier or 30 feet deeper into the cave, it would have been much harder
to extract him."

---------- Page 13 ----------


********** 11 February
Stay High Cave, Virginia
stuck, injury and aid
David Roesler, a 26-year-old undergraduate student, entered Stay
High Cave at about 3:00 p.m. The cave is named Stay High because
that is exactly what you must do to avoid getting stuck in the entrance
where the floor narrows down into a tight V. Roesler was unable to stay
high, though, and became stuck. His companion called for help and the
Newport Rescue Squad responded. When they were unable to extract him,
Blacksburg Rescue Squad's Confined Rescue Team and Virginia Tech's VPI
Cave Club were also contacted. Rescuers worked through the night with
power tools, enlarging the space and slowly hoisting him up inch by inch.
The wind chill dropped into the single digits and hypothermia became
a real concern. Numerous heat packs were placed in his clothing and at
one point, a hairdryer was used to provide warmth. As upward progress
was made, Roesler would periodically become stuck again, requiring the
removal of more bedrock. Shortly after 3:00 a.m., with rescuers assist-
ing from above and below, he was freed. He was flown to Montgomery
Regional Hospital and treated for hypothermia and a crush injury to his leg.
1. "Cave rescue February 11, 2011, near Clover Hollow," www.cavechat.
org, 15 February 2011.
2. Mallory Noe-Payne, "Student trapped in cave overnight," Collegiate
Times, 21 February 2011.
Comments: Becoming stuck in a cave has led to death on more than
one occasion. Always remember that a stuck caver is in a life-or-death
situation, and respond with appropriate urgency, as the rescuers did in
this incident.


********** 12 February
Ellisons Cave, Georgia
difficulty on rope, 2 fatalities
On 12 February, five young men and five young women from
University of Florida's Fellowship of Christian Athletes visited Ellisons Cave
for a day of exploring and rappelling. The party broke into two groups;
one group intended to explore horizontal sections of the cave while the
second group set off to rappel a 120-foot-deep pit known as The Warm-up
Pit. The first group soon joined the rest of their friends at the top of the
pit. Here, they learned that one member of their party, Grant Lockenbach
(20), had tried to rappel down to retrieve a dropped backpack. Although
they could not hear him clearly, they could tell he was shouting for help.
Five members of the party exited the cave to call for help while three
women and Michael Pirie (18) stayed at the pit.
Walker County Emergency Services (WCES) received a 911 call
reporting the rappelling accident at 2:19 p.m. Personnel, including the
cave rescue unit, were dispatched immediately. One hour after the 911
call was placed, the initial response task force (IRTF) was heading up the
mountain carrying sufficient equipment to reach Lockenbach, lower him
to the bottom of the pit, and raise him back out. This IRTF consisted of
Anmar Mirza, Tim White, and Bill Putnam. Within a half hour, the three
had hiked the one-mile-long trail with its 850-feet elevation gain and
entered the cave. Other teams were assembling and making their way up
the mountain including rigging, evacuation, and communication teams.
The IRTF reached the top of the pit and found the three women who
were cold and wet. They were dressed in shorts and T-shirts and their
only gear was kneepads and headlamps. They reported that Pirie had
rigged a second rope in order to rappel down to Lockenbach and try to
assist him. The women had not heard from either of the men in a long
time. The women then exited the cave and word was sent out that there
were now two patients.
Both Lockenbach and Pirie had rigged their ropes directly in a
waterfall instead of the standard, drier, rigging site and the noise of the
waterfall made communications difficult. The IRTF rigged a rope out of
the waterfall, and Mirza rappelled down to the level of the two men, who
were about 40 feet from the bottom. Mirza's rope was too far away and
he was unable to pendulum over to them. He shouted to them several
times but received no response from either man. As Mirza climbed back
to the top of the pit, more help arrived. Teams began rigging and prepar-
ing to lower the patients, remove them from the water, examine, treat,
and raise them from the pit. White rappelled directly in the waterfall in
order to secure the two patients to the lowering line. Once they were
lowered, both patients were examined by an EMT (emergency medical
technician) and found to be deceased. 4:1 haul system was used to raise
Lockenbach and Pirie out of the pit, one at a time. Both were extricated
from the cave by 8:30 p.m.
1. Diane Cousineau, "Recovery at Ellison's Cave," Incident Report,
undated.
2. Tyler Jett, "Deadly Depths," Get Out Chattanooga, 1 February 2012.
Comments: An inventory of Lockenbach's and Pirie's gear shows they
were not experienced enough, properly dressed, or properly equipped
to attempt this pit, especially in the full force of a waterfall. Lockenbach
was found wearing a hand-tied seat harness, and had no helmet, light,
or gloves on his person. He was attached to his rope by an ATC belay
device (which he used as a rappel device) and a handled ascender that
was clipped to his harness. A second handled ascender with no sling hung
from a carabiner attached to his harness. Pirie was wearing a commercially
sewn harness and also had an ATC but no ascending devices. His helmet
dangled from a string below him with the chinstrap open. He also had no
gloves and no light on him. A headlamp was later found lying on a ledge
near where the men had become stranded, and a mini Maglite was found
at the bottom of the pit. Both lights were still turned on.One of the first
rules of cave rescue is don't become a patient yourself. It must have been
very difficult for Pirie to sit by and do nothing, but he was not equipped
or knowledgeable enough to help his friend. It is very unfortunate that
this incident turned into a double fatality.


********** 15 February
Rustys Cave, Georgia
stranded, inadequate equipment, aid, no injury
Four young men set out to visit Byers Cave on the Southeastern
Cave Conservancy, Inc.'s Fox Mountain Cave Preserve. When they were
unable to find the cave, they used Google Earth to locate nearby Rustys
Cave. None of the young men had any vertical experience, but decided
to descend the 40-foot-deep entrance pit with a dynamic climbing rope.
They had only one harness among them. They lowered each other down,
and belayed the last person from the bottom.
After some exploring, they returned to their rope and found they
were unable to ascend. They had left word of their plans to visit Byers Cave
but had not informed anyone when their plans changed. Jerry Wallace
reports: "At this point they got really lucky, as they had a cell phone with
them, and were able to get reception from the bottom of the pit. They
called 911, and the Dade County Mountain Rescue team was dispatched.
The team arrived at the pit, rigged a haul system, and soon extracted the
four grateful but embarrassed spelunkers."
1. "Cave Resue (sic) in Rusty's Cave," www.cavechat.org, 23 February 2011.
2. Jerry Wallace, Incident Report, 21 February 2012.
Comments: Not only did the foursome have inadequate vertical
gear and apparently no plan for ascending, they were also ill-equipped
for horizontal caving. Only two of them had helmets, and these were
construction helmets with lights worn on their foreheads. At least one had
no warm clothing. These young men were indeed lucky; a cell phone call
from inside a cave is very rarely going to work out well as a rescue plan.

---------- Page 14 ----------
A more usable rescue mindset would be to call a surface watch with the
cell phone before entering a cave that was not originally on the agenda.


********** 13 March
Enchanted Rock Cave, Texas
stranded, aid, no injury
The Llano County Sheriff's Office received a report from Enchanted
Rock State Natural Area of a missing child at 1:00 in the afternoon. The
7-year-old boy had been hiking with his parents on top of Enchanted
Rock just twenty minutes earlier. Park rangers and other employees
began searching the area and nearby Echo Canyon while more resources
were put on standby. The father told a Park Ranger that his son may have
entered Enchanted Rock Cave after being told not to do so. The Ranger
made contact with hikers at the cave, who informed him that another
group had found the boy in the cave and were escorting him out. The
child exited the cave at 2:00 p.m. He told authorities he had gone into
the cave and fallen into a hole that he couldn't get out of. Other visitors
to the cave had lifted him out.
1. Texas Parks and Wildlife, "Lost Child found in Cave," Safety and Risk
Management Newsletter, page 3, May 2011.
Comments: What was likely a nightmare for the parents may well
have been a grand adventure for the young man.


********** 26 March
Neffs Cave, Utah
caver fall, injury, no aid
Five cavers were descending the 1,163-foot-deep Neffs Cave. After
six rope drops and several downclimbs, the group reached the bottom
of an area called The Devils Slide, 800 feet below the surface. As one of
the cavers was negotiating a steep, non-roped section, he slipped and fell
the remaining 5 feet, dislocating one finger and breaking another in the
process. The injured caver was able to ascend the ropes unaided to the
exit, but needed assistance, provided by belays, on the steeper climbs.
1. Lance Dickey, Incident Report, 27 March 2011.
Comments: Dickey notes the cave was wetter than usual, which
may have made for slippery conditions, and that the downclimb could
have been rigged.


********** 29 May
Sinking Cove Cave, Tennessee
lost control on rappel, injury and aid
On Memorial Day Weekend, 2011, eleven cavers entered Sinking
Cove Cave with the intent of doing a vertical through-trip from the Boulder
Entrance to the lower entrance. Completing a through-trip for this cave
requires cavers to descend six pitches, varying in depth from 23 to 53 feet,
followed by a tight belly crawl for 30 feet, then a 100-foot-long crawl in
2 feet of water with a 6-inch airspace. The total trip covers about 3,000
feet with a vertical extent of 457 feet.
Dirk Siron (53) was the last caver to descend the last drop. This drop,
like the others before it, was rigged using a traditional carabiner block, a
method used by cavers and canyoneers to retrieve a rope after one has
rappelled. When Siron rigged his figure 8 rappel device, it is believed
he rigged into the wrong side of the rope, causing him to fall 23 feet to
the bottom of the drop and land in a knee-deep pool of water. Siron's
companions quickly and carefully moved him out of the water, and began
to try and warm him with a makeshift tent and camp stove. His injuries
included a fractured pelvis, broken wrist, and compressed vertebrae. The
time of the accident was approximately 1:15 p.m.
The first organized responders arrived at 4:20 p.m. A medical
team packaged the patient in a Sked® and full-body splint to keep him
completely immobilized. Meanwhile, others worked to enlarge the crawl
space with the intention of moving Siron out via the lower entrance.
Micro-shaving of the rock eventually proved to be too slow, and it was
decided that evacuating the patient back through the upper entrance was
the better option. Rigging teams entered the cave shortly after midnight
and, three hours later, the patient had been moved up to the top of the
23-foot pitch.
The evacuation proceeded, slowly but steadily, with the next five
pitches rigged with 3:1 haul systems, counter balances, and/or traveling
redirects. A 400-foot section of tight, sinuous passage took nearly five
hours to negotiate, as only two or three rescuers could handle the litter
at any one time. Tight spaces were also challenging for the medical team
to keep intravenous fluids(IV) flowing to the patient.
After 29 hours underground, Siron finally reached the surface. An
hour and a half later he was placed in a waiting helicopter and flown to
a nearby hospital. In 2012, on the anniversary of the accident, Siron and
his companions returned to Sinking Cove and finally completed their
through-trip.
1. Brad Tipton, Incident Report, undated.
2. Dirk Siron, email communication, 10 September 2012.
Comments: Be sure to fully study, be familiar with, and inspect any
rigging that you use. Carabiner blocks can be a safe and efficient way
to rig pull-down rappels, but several important factors must always be
taken into consideration. One of the most critical is to ensure that you
rig your rappel device into the rappel (and not the pull) side of the rope.
Rigging into the pull side has had predictably disastrous results in caves
and canyons. Carabiner blocks can be safety-clipped to the anchor with
an additional carabiner for everyone except the last rappeller; that person
must still rig into the correct side of the rope.
One way to prevent rigging mishaps such as these is to get in the
habit of using the "rappel test." This simply means leaving a cowstail or
ascender clipped in to the rope or anchor, until the rappel device has been
weighted and tested for integrity.


********** 11 June
unspecified cave, Alabama
caver fall, injury and aid
Chris Gerstman and his fiancée, Joy Patterson (21), were caving with
others in Alabama on a Saturday afternoon. While traveling upwards
over breakdown, Patterson stepped over a rock and was about to turn
left when her right foot slipped out from under her. Patterson was not
aware she was next to a big drop-off and tumbled 35 to 45 feet down
it, landing face down in water. Gerstman rushed to her side and gently
turned her over, resting her head on a backpack. She told her fiancé that
her back and foot hurt badly. Jackson County Rescue Squad was noti-
fied, and they extricated Patterson in about six hours. She was airlifted
to a Huntsville hospital where she underwent surgery for a broken back.
She had also broken her foot.
1. Chris Gerstman, Incident Report, 20 June 2011.
Comments: Gerstman mentions that Patterson probably did not
see the pit because of inadequate lighting, although he did not describe
what kind of light system she was using other than to say it was an LED.
Brighter lights often equal greater safety, especially when tired or other-
wise stressed or compromised.

---------- Page 15 ----------


********** 14 July
Bone-Norman Cave System, West Virginia
overdue, no consequence
Four local, young adults were reported overdue from an attempted
through-trip in the Bone-Norman Cave System. Some of the explorers'
parents, along with fire and EMS units, were assembled near the Bone
entrance when local caver John Pearson arrived on scene sometime after
11:00 p.m. Pearson was asked to do a quick sweep of Bone Cave and report
back what he found. Over half a dozen firemen in full vertical gear (but
not caving gear) waited on standby at the entrance. Pearson entered the
cave and briefly checked the small, tight side passages, but they did not
appear to have been traversed for some time. He checked all the way to
the End Room in less than twenty minutes. Next, he backtracked to the
passage leading to the Devils Pinch, a tight spot along the connection
route. He sat quietly to see if he could hear anything beyond the pinch.
He took a rock and pounded it three times, then listened again, repeating
this for several more minutes. Convinced the lost group was not on his
side of the Pinch, Pearson headed for the entrance. He met fellow caver
Dave Cowan, who had also come to search, on the way out. When they
exited the cave, the firemen were no longer at the entrance. Pearson and
Cowan then attended a debriefing downhill from the entrance. Just as
Pearson was reasoning that inexperienced cavers could not make it back
up through the Devils Pinch, the missing group exited the cave and began
coming down the hill. When they spotted the would-be-rescuers, they
went straight for their vehicles and drove off with their parents.
1. John Pearson, "7.14," The West Virginia Caver, volume 29, number 5,
page 12, October 2011.
2. John Pearson, email communication, 29 February 2012.
Comments: This was a case of a person who had done the through-
trip once before trying to lead other inexperienced cavers. They must have
turned around when they could not find their way, but not early enough
to meet their out time This incident also shows the need for establish-
ing and maintaining an entrance control during rescues. Doing so would
have prevented the subjects from exiting the scene without a debriefing
or medical evaluation.


********** 17 July
Worleys (Morrill) Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury and aid
At 3:30 p.m., a group of five children and six adults entered Worleys
Cave. The group had made it to a slippery, muddy area known as the
Skating Rink within an hour. While traversing this section, a 19-year-old
female slipped and fell, twisting her ankle. Several members of the group
heard her ankle "pop." The trip leader examined her and determined she
would need assistance to exit.
Three people stayed with the patient while the trip leader and the
rest headed for the surface. The trip leader called fellow Mountain Empire
Grotto members and a rescue was initiated. Cavers were the first to
respond and packaged the patient in a basket litter. Cavers from Mountain
Empire and Flittermouse Grottos moved the patient through the cave
by leap-frogging the evacuation teams. One pitch, known as the Devils
Staircase, was rigged in order to lower the patient down it. Closer to the
entrance, the litter was placed in a rig with a large wheel and wheeled
the rest of the way out. The patient reached the surface shortly after
midnight and was transported by ambulance to a hospital.
1. Mark Woods, Incident Report, 18 July 2011.
Comments: Note that a fairly simple and common incident one hour
into the cave resulted in an evacuation time in excess of seven hours from
time of injury to time of exit. Even when executed perfectly, cave rescues
can take a long time.


********** 30 July
Spanish Moss Cave, Utah
difficulty on rope, no consequence
A novice caver was ascending the 30-foot-deep entrance pit of
Spanish Moss Cave when an excess amount of webbing from his chest
harness became stuck in his Croll. This was only his second time on rope
and he was wearing a climbing-type harness. The harness made it diffi-
cult for him to maintain an upright position while trying to remove the
webbing from his Croll. Eventually another member of the caving party
climbed up to him on another rope that had been pre-rigged as a backup
and was able to assist him.
1. Kent Forman, Incident Report, 1 November 2012.
Comments: Photos from the incident show the stuck caver in almost
a horizontal position. A vertical caver with a properly adjusted climbing
system should be able to maintain a more vertical position, which would
require less effort to maintain during a self rescue. The caver stuck on rope
was also wearing a large backpack, which probably made staying vertical
even more difficult. Tethering a cave pack, so that it hangs below you
while on rope, is generally a more efficient practice. New cavers should
practice changeovers and situations simulating gear problems extensively
before entering vertical caves.


********** 1 August
Glade Cave, Virginia
illness, aid, no injury
Sarah Murphy (18) and others from Camp May Flather were explor-
ing Glade Cave for the day. After several hours in the cave, Murphy had a
seizure, causing her to fall about 20 feet, landing in water. Rescue workers
were notified around 3:15 p.m. that a woman was injured 315 feet inside
the cave. Although it is a horizontal cave, a haul system was needed to
bring her to the surface. She was treated for hypothermia and transported
to the University of Virginia Medical Center for evaluation. The rescue
took less than two hours to complete.
1. Ken Slack, "Rescue at Glade Cave," www.nbc29.com, 2 August 2011.
2. Megan Davis, "Crews Use Pulley to Rescue Woman From Cave," The
News Virginian, 2 August 2011.
Comments: No injuries were reported. It was also not reported if
Murphy had experienced seizures before.


********** 6 August
Worleys (Morrill) Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury and aid
Kristi Anderson (26) and her boyfriend, John, were part of a tour
group led by a local adventure company in Tennessee's popular Worleys
Cave on the afternoon of 6 August. While traversing an area that was
the scene of a rescue less than a month before, Anderson slipped and
fell, suffering a trimalleolar (ankle) and fibular fracture. Her ankle was
splinted with materials on-hand, and John began carrying her back toward
the entrance. Another group in the cave (there were several that day)
came across them and suggested they backtrack and exit via the stream
passage. This would prevent them from having to climb a steep section
known as the Devils Staircase. After changing their course, Anderson's
group came across a Scout Troop being led by cavers Gary Powers and
Clay Stowers. Powers hurried ahead of the group and exited the cave to
call local authorities.
Local EMS and Kingsport Fire and Rescue were quick to respond.
The Incident Commander sent three cavers, Powers, Stowers, and Robbie
Spiegel, into the cave along with an EMS member named Randy. They were
given a Ferno (a type of rigid stretcher commonly used in cave rescue)

---------- Page 16 ----------
and rescue kit to take to the patient. A short way into the cave, Randy
dislocated his finger, but decided he could continue. Anderson's group
was encountered about 1,300 feet into the cave. Her splint had already
been replaced by yet another group in the cave. Randy replaced this splint
with a sturdier one and then tended to his own injury.
The Kingsport rescue crew arrived around 4:00 p.m. and set up an IV
to give Anderson morphine. From here, the rescue moved quickly as the
Ferno was alternately dragged and carried through the cave. A wheel was
attached to the Ferno, as in the rescue the previous month, for a portion
of the evacuation. After eight hours in the cave, Anderson was brought
to the surface and taken to the hospital for emergency surgery. It was
several months before she could walk again.
1. Robbie Spiegel, Incident Report, 30 April 2012.
Comments: The tour group that Anderson was a part of supplied its
patrons with helmets and lights, but allowed her to wear tennis shoes.
Sturdy boots with good tread are generally a better choice than tennis
shoes for providing traction in a cave. Spiegel notes that the original
rescue kit sent in to the patient did not contain blankets or other items
to prevent hypothermia. Keeping a patient warm should always be a top
priority in a cave rescue.


********** 4 September
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
lost, aid, no injury
On Sunday evening during the Old Timers' Caving Reunion, usually
referred to as OTR, a couple in their sixties were reported overdue from
a caving trip to Sharps Cave. A gentleman (who had not been in the cave
for many years) and his companion got turned around, and were unable
to find their way out. A rescue team was organized at OTR, but when
they arrived at the cave, the missing cavers had already been found and
escorted out by the Slatyfork cave rescue team.
1. "Sharps Cave," The West Virginia Caver , volume 29, number 5, page
10, October 2011.
2. Carl Amundson, email communication, 8 March 2012.
Comments: The importance of a good, reliable surface watch can
never be over-emphasized.


********** 17 September
Bone-Norman Cave System, West Virginia
medical issue, injury, no aid
Stephanie Petri (25), Dave Socky, Alan Staton, Susan Burr, Jessica
Jones, Bill Walker, Brian Williams, and Becky Frederickson visited Norman
Cave for a day of exploring. As Petri was making her way through the tight
spot in the entrance, her knee "froze up," causing her a great deal of pain.
Her knee had done this in the past, and she thought she might be able to
continue if she could get her knee to relax. When nothing helped, Staton
stabilized her knee and Petri was able to scoot backwards toward the
entrance. Once on the surface, she was helped down the trail and back
to her vehicle. Petri was not in as much pain at this point, but she was
unable to drive her truck which has a manual transmission. Staton drove
her back to Roanoke with Jones following in Petri's vehicle.
1. Susan Burr, "Cave Rescue Report," The West Virginia Caver, volume
30, number 1, page1, February 2012. (Reprinted from the Carbide Dump,
V46v9p56, November 2011.)
2. Alan Staton, phone communication, 12 March 2012.
Comments: Staton notes that it was very fortunate the incident did
not occur farther into the cave.


********** 1 October
Wind Cave, Kentucky
caver fall, injury and aid
An American Caving Accidents incident report was submitted online
regarding a rescue at Wind Cave in Kentucky. The incident type was listed
as a caver fall, with the result of injury and aid, although no other details
were supplied. A follow-up with the person submitting the report only
revealed that the incident had been reported in a local newspaper.
1. Nicholas Taylor, Incident Report, 9 October 2011.
Comments: Since this incident could not be verified, it is not included
in the statistics. Please contact the ACA editor at aca@caves.org with any
information regarding this incident.


********** 16 October
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave, Wyoming
lost, aid, no injury
Three amateur cavers, all men in their early twenties, entered Fossil
Mountain Ice Cave with plans to do a through-trip to Wind Cave. After
entering on a Saturday morning, they worked their way down the multiple
drops until they reached the maze area in Wind Cave. Here, they either
could not find the route to the Wind Cave entrance, or they were not
aware that they needed to do a 20-foot climb to exit. Most parties doing
a through trip pre-rig this pitch but this group did not.
At 2:00 the next afternoon, they left a note in the maze area saying
they were retreating. A few hours later they left another note near Crotch
Lake saying they were heading back to the Fossil Mountain Ice Cave
entrance. They ascended several ropes that are permanently rigged in the
cave but it was slow going due to their lack of traditional ascending gear.
Meanwhile, the men's families notified the Teton County Sheriff's
Department when they had not returned by Sunday morning. Search
teams entered the cave system from both entrances and searched as far as
the first drop at either end. When the missing trio was not found, another
search was initiated, this time with the plan that both search teams would
continue until they met in the middle. The team who entered from the
Wind Cave side found the note that was left in the maze area about 8:00
p.m. The other search team located the missing men shortly before 10:00
p.m. The trio was tired and hungry but otherwise unhurt. They exited the
cave and made the long hike down the mountain, reaching the parking
area at 4:00 a.m. Monday morning.
1. "Another FMIC Rescue," www.cavechat.org, 17 October 2011.
2. Brielle Schaeffer, "Team rescues 3 cavers," Jackson Hole Daily, 18
October 2011.
Comments: The usual Fossil Mountain Ice Cave-Wind Cave through
trip requires pulling down the rope after the first drop in Fossil Mountain
Ice Cave. Once this rope is pulled, cavers are committed to completing
the trip. Most rescues at this cave occur because groups get lost, they
find the cave plugged with ice beyond the first drop, or they are unable
to ascend a 20-foot pitch to exit on the Wind Cave side. Because of the
committing nature of pull-down caving, any such trip should be well-
researched in advance.


********** 12 November
Peppersauce Cave, Arizona
caver fall, injury and aid
A teenage boy was exploring Peppersauce Cave with his father and
fellow boy scouts when he slipped and injured his knee. Reports vary as
to how far he was from the entrance, from 50 to 600 feet, but he was
unable to exit on his own. Hikers in the area heard of his predicament and
offered to help. They splinted his leg with tree branches and used a plastic
picnic table as a stretcher. When the stretcher would not fit through a

---------- Page 17 ----------
constriction in the entrance area, he was wrapped in tarps "like a burrito"
and passed through. The rescuers carried him down the hill where they
were met by a Pinal County Sheriff who determined the youth was mildly
hypothermic and showing signs of shock. He was airlifted to a hospital.
1. Tim Vetscher, "Injured teen pulled from cave in S. Arizona," www.abc15.
com, 13 November 2011.
2. "Hikers Rescue Injured Teen From Cave," www.myfoxphoenix.com,
13 November 2011.
3. Associated Press, "Teen rescued after falling in Arizona's Mount
www.azcentral.com, 14 November 2011.
Comments: Photos of the teen, his father, and others taken in the
cave that day show that they were not wearing helmets. Despite only being
in the warm, desert cave for a total of about two hours, the patient was
already showing signs of shock and hypothermia. These two conditions
are often a secondary result from injuries and should be considered as
potential problems facing anyone injured in a cave.


********** 1 December
Buckner Cave, Indiana
caver fall, injury and aid
A group of five amateur cavers entered the Richard Blenz Nature
Preserve's Buckner Cave for a day of exploring. Approximately 1,700 feet
into the cave, in an area known as The Volcano Passage, a 26-year-old
female fell approximately 8 feet. Three members of her group left to
call for help when she reported severe pain in her hip and had difficulty
moving on her own.
Anmar Mirza, the property manager, received the call at 7:00 p.m.
and rounded up several other rescue-trained cavers. Mirza reports,
"Before going in to the cave, Monroe County 911 dispatch was called to
inform them of the situation. Anmar and Jessica [Deli], both EMTs, then
proceeded into the cave. When they reached the patient, she and her
boyfriend had been slowly making their way out of the cave with him
essentially putting her on his lap and moving a bit at a time, and had
moved about 200 feet. Anmar performed a quick secondary survey and
determined that the pelvis was involved and probably fractured. Her
vital signs were good and her morale was high, so he then left Jessica in
charge medically of the patient with instructions to continue slowly and
carefully moving towards the entrance as her pain would allow and to
closely monitor her vital signs.
"As more cavers arrived on scene, they were sent into the cave
along with a SKED litter and two Oregon Spine Splints. Leanne [Hughes]
was assigned to coordinate the litter evacuation. One OSS was applied
normally and the other was applied upside down along the outer leg on
the affected side. The litter handling team was instructed to be very gentle
with the patient but that she needed to be evacuated as quickly as possible
as there was essentially no treatment that could be done underground in
the timeframe available. The litter began moving at 9:30 p.m.
"By 11:00 p.m. the patient was at the entrance of the cave where
Van Buren Township Fire Department volunteers were waiting to help
carry her up the hill to the parking lot and by 11:05 p.m. she was in the
back of the ambulance and on her way to the hospital. Total evacuation
time was approximately an hour and a half and that included several
hundred feet of belly crawl where the litter could not just be dragged
due to her injuries."
The patient was diagnosed as having broken her pelvis in three places.
She required surgery and the placement of pins and screws along with
confinement to a wheelchair for three months.
1. "Buckner Cave Rescue 12-1-2011," www.cavechat.org, 2 December
2011.
2. Anmar Mirza, Incident Report, 6 April 2012.
Comments: Mirza concludes his report with these comments: "A
pelvic fracture is a very serious injury and one of the most difficult ones
for cave rescue. Not only is it very painful, but the possibility of major
blood vessels to be damaged and the patient to bleed into the pelvis with
little outside sign exists until suddenly the vital signs crash. The ideal litter
for this type of evacuation is the rigid litter such as the Ferno-Washington
basket, but this litter was not available in the cache at that time
and
would have necessitated a two-hour wait to obtain. These are difficult
decisions to make for the rescue manager but ultimately these situations
are better treated outside the cave in the appropriate care facility. This
rescue was also facilitated by the fact that everyone involved had had
previous NCRC (National Cave Rescue Commission) training and several
of the responders were NCRC instructors."


********** 3 December
unspecified cave, Illinois
near drowning*, injury, no aid
Chad McCain, Todd McCartney (44), Ralph Sawyer, and Jason Kern
planned to spend roughly 10 to 16 hours in an Illinois cave pushing a water-
filled passage with low airspace. McCain, the only member of the group
who had not been in the cave before, led the way upstream, encounter-
ing low airspaces of 6 to 10 inches. Moving ahead with helmet in hand,
he hesitated when the ceiling came to within only 3 inches of the water.
McCartney was better dressed for the cold water, with a neoprene
hoodie in addition to a wetsuit, and decided to push ahead, leaving his
pack with the rest of the group. Holding his helmet in front of him, he
continued upstream in 3 to 4 feet of water, with his nose pressed against
the ceiling. When he reached a point 40 feet beyond McCain's furthest
advance, he began kicking and "thrashing" in the water, then disappeared
around a bend in the passage.
The others heard periodic bouts of thrashing and silence, and
assumed McCartney had found passage with more air. When the thrashing
continued, McCain moved upstream a little ways, calling for McCartney.
McCartney's light suddenly came into view, but he was obviously in
trouble. McCain saw McCartney go underwater, then float up next to
the wall, face down and not moving. McCain and Sawyer rushed to their
friend. In the very low airspace, Sawyer momentarily panicked and went
underwater, only to pop up in a small air bell, losing his helmet and light
and cutting his face on the rock wall.
McCain eventually reached McCartney after about 45 seconds,
grabbed him, and started dragging him downstream toward Kern. The
nearest place to get McCartney completely out of the water was still over
600 feet away, but an area was found that only had 10 inches of water and
more than a foot of air. When McCartney was rolled over, his eyes were
glassy and caked with mud. McCain began cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR). Sawyer and Kern now joined him and helped keep McCartneys's
head out of water and administered rescue breaths. After two to three
minutes, McCartney regained consciousness. They then moved him
another 30 feet downstream to a mudbank where he could sit up.
The cavers now knew they had two real problems: getting McCartney
out of the cave as quickly as possible, and doing so with very few remain-
ing light sources. Sawyer and McCartney had both lost their helmets
and StenLights®. McCartney only had one extra Maglite, Sawyer had a
couple of small Maglites and Kern had one small secondary headlamp.
McCain was equipped with an extra Apex and Fenix which he shared
with the others.
Working their way back to the entrance, McCartney started off slow
and lethargic, and he coughed up a lot of water, but eventually he began
picking up speed. It was a long trek out, including a 300-foot-long bathtub
crawl with 6 inches of air-space. McCartney was pulled through this section
by McCain tethering two Swaygo packs, which are waterproof and buoy-
ant, to his waist and having McCartney rest his head and chest on them.
At the entrance, they rigged a short climb with a rope and were able to
assist McCartney up it from above and below. They were out of the cave

---------- Page 18 ----------
six hours after entering and 3.5 hours after the accident. McCartney spent
four days in the hospital but has made a full recovery.
1. Chad McCain, Incident Report, 28 December 2011.
2. Chad McCain, email communication, 27 February 2012.
Comments: The participants warn others about becoming compla-
cent about low airspace, and that no passage, discovery, or potential
connection is worth dying for. This incident also underscores the impor-
tance of having extra lights that are not attached to your helmet.
Drowning is death from suffocation caused by immersion. Incidents
where a person survives from immersion suffocation are referred to as
a "near drowning."


********** 13 December
Smiths Crack, Idaho
caver fall, injury and aid
Jordan Jones and a friend decided to visit Smiths Crack, a fissure cave
in southern Idaho that is a popular destination for cavers as well as the
general public. Jones and his friend were on their lunch break and had no
caving gear. They climbed down the narrow fissure and into a small room
below. Jones's friend climbed out first. When Jones followed, his tennis
shoe slipped on an icy patch of rock and he fell 25 feet to the bottom,
breaking his leg just above the ankle.
His friend called for help around 2:00 p.m. Elmore County Search
and Rescue, Mountain Home Extrication Team, and paramedics arrived
on scene. Rescues at Smiths Crack are not uncommon, says Alan Roberts
of the Mountain Home extrication team, occurring on average once a
year. This one took a little more effort as Jones is 6-foot, 5-inches tall and
weighs 300 pounds. He was placed in a Stokes basket and raised vertically
out of the cave. After two hours he was out of the cave and flown to a
hospital. Besides his broken leg, he was showing signs of hypothermia.
1. "Victim lost footing, fell into Elmore County cave," www.nwcn.com,
13 December 2011.
2. Brian S. Orban, "Man rescued after falling into cave," Mountain Home
News, 14 December 2011.
2011 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents


********** 31 January
Eagles Nest sinkhole, Florida
fatality
Bill Bowden, a certified cave diver, was diving the Eagles Nest sinkhole
using a rebreather. When he surfaced, witnesses say he was speaking
clearly but suffering from decompression sickness. Bowden was taken to
a hospital where he later died.
1. "Eagle's Nest 1-31-11," www.cavediver.net, 1 February 2011.
Comments: Decompression sickness (DCS) occurs when inert gases,
built up in the body's tissues, form bubbles during a diver's ascent. These
bubbles can form anywhere in the body but most commonly in the joints
(which is why decompression sickness is often referred to as "the bends").
To avoid DCS, divers practice staged decompression. "Staged" means
stopping at progressively shallower depths for increasingly longer times
to allow inert gasses to exit bodily tissues safely.
Bowden had recently undergone open-heart surgery and had a
valve replacement, but was released to dive by his physician. His friends
Comments: Tennis shoes do not provide enough traction and are
inadequate footwear for most caves. Lug-soled boots are usually a better
choice. Caves that contain ice sometimes require even more specialized
traction devices.


********** 31 December
Sótano de las Guaguas, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
lost control on rappel, injury, no aid
On New Year's Eve, Sarah Crowder, John Deighan, Alex Booker, Beth
Mutchler, and Robert Harris rigged two ropes in Sótano de las Guaguas.
After rigging the high side of the pit (~700 feet), Deighan rigged and
descended the low side (~470 feet), which the cavers would later use
for ascending. Mutchler and Harris both rappelled the high side without
incident. When Crowder got on rope, she had difficulty moving down the
slope to the lip due to friction. She dropped the sixth and fifth bars of
her rack and proceeded on four. As she went over the lip, her fourth bar
dropped off and she began rappelling out of control on only three bars.
Deighan was ready with a bottom belay but did not know Crowder
was in trouble until she had probably fallen a couple hundred feet. His
belay was enough to slow her so that when she landed on him, he was
not injured. Crowder's left hand was badly injured, however. When she
passed the lip, her left hand had become trapped between the rope and
rack body.
The cavers in the pit radioed up to Booker who brought down clean
water, disinfectant, and bandages to dress her wounds. Crowder and the
rest of the group then exited the pit via the shorter rope. Back in town
they were unable to find a medical facility so they drove to Brownsville,
Texas, the following day where a physician cleaned and redressed her
wounds. Crowder later required surgery to repair tendons and skin but
is expected to make a full recovery.
1. John Deighan, Incident Report, 8 February 2012.
Comments: Cavers should be aware that flexing of a rack frame
against the lip of a pit can cause bars to drop. Cavers should always cross
a lip with more than enough bars engaged rather than "just enough."
Fighting against friction at the lip is a small price to pay in order to remain
in control of the rappel.
speculate he may have been having chest pains, which caused him to
surface too quickly.


********** 17 April
Chassahowitzka River, Florida
drowning, fatality
Amy Ryan, a 22-year-old University of South Florida senior,
went swimming with friends in the Seven Sisters Springs area in the
Chassahowitzka River. The springs are connected by short, shallow, under-
water caves which Ryan had free-dived at least once before. When Ryan
attempted a dive through a 15-foot-long section, she did not resurface.
Her boyfriend swam through several times looking for her while another
friend called 911. Rescuers responded within moments and pulled her
from a crevice she had mistakenly swum into. She was taken to a hospital
in Spring Hill where she was pronounced dead.
Within a week, cave divers installed warning signs at both ends of the
swim-through in order to prevent future accidents at this location. The
signs were donated by the National Speleological Society's Cave Diving
Section and the National Association for Cave Diving.

---------- Page 19 ----------
1. "USF student drowns," www.cavediver.net, 18 April 2011.
2. John Woodrow Cox and Jessica Vander Velde, "USF student drowns in
Citrus cave-diving accident," Tampa Bay Times, 19 April 2011.
3. Walter Pickel, "Warning Signs at Chassahowitzka Springs," www.cave-
atlas.com, 25 April 2011.
Comments: Free-diving through these caves is a popular activ-
ity among visitors to the springs. Most, like Ryan, have no cave-diving
training or equipment. Without a guideline or lights it is easy to become
disoriented and a single breath does not allow much time for mistakes.


********** 9 June
Devils Eye Spring, Florida
medical issue, fatality
Sixty-eight-year-old Richard DeVan suffered a heart attack while exit-
ing the Devils Ear entrance of Devils Eye Spring in Ginnie Springs Resort.
DeVan had been scuba diving since the 1970s and had been cave diving
since the early 1990s.
1. "Fatality at Ginnie," www.cavediver.net, 9 June 2011.
2. Mary Lu Strange, "Richard DeVan was an avid diver," www.cincinnati.
com, 27 June 2011.


********** 11 June
Whiskey Still Sink, Florida
drowning, fatality
Jim Miller and two others were diving in a section of the Woodville
Karst Plain known as Whiskey Still Sink on RB80 rebreathers. The planned
dive was to traverse the shallow-depth conduit to Innisfree Sink and
continue beyond there to a depth of almost 220 feet, followed by staged
decompression stops on the way back up to Innisfree. The team carried
deco gas (gas mixtures used at various depths for decompression stops)
to be used at 120 and 70 feet below the surface and oxygen at 20 feet.
Their bottom mix was for a depth of 240 feet.
The team started their dive using their 120 bottles, which were
suitable for the conduit's depth. At 70 feet, the team stopped to stage
their 70 bottles. Miller, who has been described as a meticulous and
safety-conscious diver, mistakenly dropped one of his 240 bottles here,
and continued further into the cave.
At the 120-foot stop, the divers were now ready to switch to their
240 gas. Here, Miller made a second error and switched to his 70 bottle.
Protocol usually requires not only a diver, but his dive partner(s), to verify
that the right bottle is being used. Unfortunately, this was overlooked on
this particular dive.
The three continued the dive for a little less than an hour, with Miller
using the wrong bottle the whole time, and turned around at the planned
time. Shortly after turning around, Miller had a seizure. His buddies were
unable to revive him despite their best efforts.
1. "Fatality in the WKP," www.cavediver.net, 14 June 2011.
Comments: The official cause of death was drowning, but what actu-
ally caused the fatality is called "oxygen toxicity." Pure (100%) oxygen can
only be safely breathed to a depth of about 20 feet underwater. The 70
bottle wasn't pure oxygen, having some nitrogen as well, but was intended
for depths of 70 feet and shallower.
Miller's final depth was not reported, but since he had a 240 bottle,
the depth was probably deeper than 200 feet. That is over three times
the safe level of oxygen for that depth. Breathing this level of oxygen for
such a prolonged time can (and did) cause seizures. Once a diver has a
seizure, it is very difficult to switch to the appropriate gas mixture, since
the jaw usually clamps shut.


********** 16 October
Sistema Cocodrilo, Quintana Roo, Mexico
fatality
Brendan Lee Napier and four of his dive buddies began a survey dive
in Sistema Cocodrilo on Cozumel Island on the morning of 16 October
2011. Their plan was to travel 4,200 feet into the cave and video map a
room known as the Air Dome. At 11:19 a.m., Napier led the team into the
cave. Within fifteen minutes, his pace accelerated, and the team became
strung out as they tried to keep pace. Moments later, he began convuls-
ing and floated to the ceiling. By the time his buddies reached him, he
was unconscious and his regulators were out of his mouth. His bailout
regulator was deployed and dangling and his rebreather loop and bailout
tank had been closed.
Napier's dive buddies pried his clenched jaws apart and purged a
regulator into his mouth. They then began moving him out while continu-
ing to purge the regulator in his mouth. They reached the surface in
eighteen minutes, cut away his gear and suit and began CPR. An ambu-
lance arrived twenty minutes later, but unfortunately, Napier could not
be revived.
1. Michael Angelo Gagliardi, "Report on accident at Sistem[a] Cocodrilo,"
www.rebreatherpro.com, undated.
Comments: A review of the events by the dive team showed that
Napier did nothing wrong and broke no rules. An autopsy revealed that
he died of carbon monoxide poisoning, leading the team to suspect that
he had received a bad mixture of gas in his tank. In the future, his team
insists they will all be adding a carbon monoxide analyzer to their dive
kit and encourage others to do the same.
The National Cave Rescue Commission
www.caves.org/io/ncrc
The National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) received its charter
from the National Speleological Society in 1979, and serves as the
Society's representative on issues of cave rescue training and opera-
tions. It is a volunteer group developed primarily to train and track
cave rescue resources throughout the United States.
The NCRC does not perform cave rescues. It organizes, develops,
and provides training in cave rescue techniques, maintains list
of individuals trained in cave rescue, and can help locate rescue
resources in times of need. Most NCRC-trained cavers do participate
in rescues, but not as part of the NCRC. They work as members of
their local rescue teams, civil defense units, or cave rescue groups.
The NCRC sponsors a week-long Cave Rescue Operations and Man-
agement Seminar each year that is held in various locations around
the United States. The seminar serves as a "boot camp" of cave res-
cue and provides three levels of training. Cave rescue is constantly
evolving, and the most up-to-date techniques are presented each
year. In addition to the annual week-long seminar, the NCRC regions
sponsor regional week-long seminars, regional modular seminars
(taught over a series of weekends), courses in small-group and self-
rescue techniques, and weekend cave rescue orientation courses.
Information on NCRC operation, activities, and training is published
each year in the NSS Members Manual, and is available on the NCRC
website at www.ncrc.info. Upcoming seminars are announced on
the website and in the NSS News.

---------- Page 20 ----------
2011 Caving-Related Accidents and Incidents
2011, date unknown
unspecified lava tube, Hawaii
fell into lava tube, injury, no aid
CJ Kale (34) was hiking across a lava field to photograph scenes of
lava as it contacted ocean waves when he fell about 20 feet down into a
lava tube, shattering his ankle. Kale reports, "After climbing out we had
to lash my foot to my leg with a tripod, camera strap and belt and hike
over the rugged terrain for two miles."
1. "Daredevil photographers brave boiling waters to capture the drama
of searing-hot lava crashing into the seas off Hawaii," www.dailymail.
co.uk, 5 September 2012.
Comments: This is a nice example of well-improvised first aid.


********** 3 January
unnamed pit, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
fell into pit, aid, no injury
An 85-year-old woman fell into a 45-foot-deep pit in the municipality
of Tamasopo. The woman, locally known as Luca, spent 16 hours in the
pit before being rescued by local firefighters and the Mexican Red Cross.
Reports say she was unhurt.
1. Cave accident in San Luis Potosí, Mex., www.cavechat.org, 5 January
2011.
Comments: No other information was available but we can assume
the elderly woman had not intended to enter the pit, making this a
caving-related incident.


********** 20 January
Carter Memorial Wayside Caves, Virginia
body found in cave
Acting on a tip, Wythe County Sheriff's deputies discovered the
body of an infant hidden under a rock in a roadside cave. In court, Ashley
Meadows (21) admitted giving birth to the infant at home. She claimed
she gave her daughter to her mother, Twyla Meadows. Twyla testified
that she found the infant already dead in Ashley's room and concealed it
first in an outbuilding, then in the cave which she passes on her way to
work. Ashley has received three years for felony child abuse. Her mother
pleaded guilty to a felony charge for concealing a body and faces up to
five years in prison.
1. Amy Matzke-Fawcett, "Grandmother testifies that she hid dead baby
in Wythe County case," Roanoke Times, 2 August 2011.
2. Jeffrey Simmons, "Wythe woman sentenced in cave baby case," SWVA
Today, 23 February 2012.
3. Jeff Simmons, "Grandmother pleads guilty in Wythe County cave baby
case," The Wytheville Enterprise, 8 March 2012.
Comments: It is not unusual for caves to be used for crimes and
illegal activities. Cavers should report any suspicious activities to authori-
ties immediately.


********** 5 March
Ellenville Fault Ice Caves, New York
fell into cave, aid, no injury
Jennifer Stieles (22) and her sister, Michelle Stieles (19), were spend-
ing an afternoon photographing ice formations around the caves. Shortly
after 4:00 p.m., one of the sisters slipped on the ice, knocking over the
other sister, and they both slid down into the fault. The sisters were unhurt
but unable to climb back out or exit through the bottom due to an iced-
over trail along the cliffs. Using a cell phone, the sisters called 911. The
Walker Valley Fire Company's technical rescue team was able to get the
women into harnesses and haul them back to the surface. After a four-hour
rescue, the sisters were wet and cold but otherwise in good condition.
1. Deborah Medenbach, "Sisters escape serious harm in Ice Caves fall,"
www.recordonline.com, 8 March 2011.
Comments: It is a good idea to always maintain at least a body's
length between yourself and the edge of a pit, cliff, or crevasse. More
distance may be required if ice is present.


********** 14 March
Ape Cave, Washington
exhausted, hypothermic, injury and aid
John and Robert Okey were on their way to Ape Cave when the road
became impassable due to deep snow about one mile from the cave. After
eating a light lunch, they continued toward the cave on foot, walking in
the footprints of a previous hiker. Robert wore shorts and gaiters, and
both had only light outer garments. The only supplies they took with them
were three flashlights and one energy drink. They explored the lava tube
for about two hours, finally reaching the upper entrance. Here they found
the snow to be quite a bit deeper than at the lower entrance. Robert,
who is 6-foot, 5-inches tall, weighs close to 400 pounds, and has Type 2
diabetes, decided he was too tired to try and return through the cave.
The brothers thought hiking down the hill on the surface would be easier.
The deep snow made for very slow going, however. Robert tried to
fashion snowshoes out of broken tree branches; this did not work and
he cut his hand badly in the process. Eventually, John decided to try to
make it to the parking area and an emergency phone on his own, while
Robert followed at a slower pace. Again the snow proved to be too deep,
and they were unable to continue.
Both brothers were now extremely cold, their legs and feet numb,
and Robert's hand was still bleeding. About the time they decided to
retreat to the cave, they heard voices and shouted for help. Four hikers
soon arrived, and escorted the brothers back to the cave and down the
entrance ladder. One of the hikers was able to call 911 on a cell phone
at 4:10 p.m.
Inside the cave, the hikers helped the brothers remove their wet
clothing, and gave them dry clothes, socks, chemical heat packs, food,
and water. Stephen Schutts, a paramedic and team coordinator of the
volunteer Volcano Rescue Team, was the first to arrive with blankets and
more heat packs. Sergeant Jay Johnson from Skamania County Sheriff's
Office arrived next, with more supplies and body bags. The brothers were
wrapped in blankets and placed in the body bags, along with heat packs
and hot water bottles to warm them. The brothers eventually recovered
their strength and were able to once again climb the ladder out of the
cave. On the surface, they were given snowshoes and helped down the
trail. The brothers were then placed in a sled and pulled by an all-terrain
vehicle to a waiting ambulance. They were examined but showed no signs
of frostbite. They were then released to drive themselves home.
1. Bob Albrecht, "Two Camas men rescued near Ape Cave," The
Columbian, 15 March 2011.
2. John Branton, "Rescue at Ape Cave," The Columbian, 20 March 2011.
Comments: The brothers were not dressed properly for the cave
or outside elements. Robert Okey later told reporters, "It takes a couple

---------- Page 21 ----------
of bad judgment calls to end up in a very bad situation. It's so easy to
underestimate how quickly a situation can go bad." This is true. Plan
ahead, and don't skimp on emergency supplies.


********** 30 March
unspecified cave, Kentucky
dog stranded in cave
Roger Moore was out hunting with his coon dog, Half Pint, in Metcalfe
County when Half Pint chased a raccoon into a cave. Moore waited at the
entrance for several hours but Half Pint did not return so he eventually
contacted Metcalfe County Emergency Management officials. By the time
two firefighters with the skills to reach her could be located, Half Pint had
been underground for nine days. The firefighters braved the water and
low airspace to find the dog waiting on a ledge just above the water. She
was brought to the surface and found to be in reasonably good condition.
1. Josh Breslow, "Dog Rescued After Spending 9 Days Trapped In Cave,"
Lex 18 News, 30 March 2011.
2. The Associated Press, "Dog that ran into KY cave rescued after 10 days,"
www.seattlepi.com, 31 March 2011.
Comments: There is no word on what became of the raccoon.
April
San Sebastián, Puerto Rico
histoplasmosis
In April 2011, the National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) held its
annual Operations and Management Seminar in San Sebastián, Puerto
Rico. A number of caves were visited, some repeatedly, during the course
of the seminar. After the seminar concluded, several attendees began
to experience symptoms which ranged from mild fatigue to debilitating
pulmonary illness. Since attendees were from all over the U.S., it took
some time to realize that many had developed these symptoms. A survey
was sent to all seminar participants to try and determine the extent of
the illness.
Of the 101 attendees, 16 developed symptoms of fatigue, cough,
general malaise (tiredness and weakness), and/or body aches. Another
five students developed severe pulmonary symptoms and/or were diag-
nosed with histoplasmosis. All but two of the 21 attendees who fell ill were
from outside the area in which histoplasmosis is generally considered to
be endemic (always or usually present in the population) and these two
had little previous exposure to caves. The endemic area is roughly defined
as east of the Mississippi and south of the Ohio Rivers. Persons living in
the endemic area are less likely to develop severe illness due to previous
exposure to the agent.
Histoplasmosis is an infection that occurs from the spores of the
fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. The spores are usually present in the
soil and are much more prevalent in soil contaminated by bird or bat
droppings. The spores usually enter the body by inhalation. Persons with
a weakened immune system are more susceptible to a severe infection,
but even very healthy people can become quite ill with a large enough
exposure. Flu-like symptoms are the most common if there are any
symptoms at all. Some people develop more severe pulmonary symptoms
which can mimic pneumonia. A smaller number of people develop symp-
toms throughout their bodies, which are caused by the body's immune
response to the infection. Most people recover from histoplasmosis
without treatment, but those with more severe symptoms may require
antifungal medications. Antibiotics, which are effective against bacteria,
have no effect on fungal infections.
Although the topic of histoplasmosis, or "histo" as it is often referred
to, frequently comes up in caving circles, it may not be high on a list of
illnesses considered by a health care provider in a patient presenting with
fever, cough, and fatigue. Thus, it is very important for cavers who experi-
ence such symptoms to inform their health care provider of their visits
to caves and possible exposure to histoplasmosis. It may be necessary to
request, or even demand, testing for histoplasmosis.
The fact that the students all returned to their homes after the semi-
nar represents an epidemiologist's nightmare: an infection in a dispersed
population. Fortunately, communication between students who had
attended the seminar brought the problem to light.
1. Dr. Stephen Mosberg, Incident Report, 14 April 2012.
Comments: For more information about histoplasmosis, visit: www.
incbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0002073/, www.cdc.gov/fungal/
histoplasmosis/, or www.caves.org/section/medical/introfect.htm


********** 2 May
unspecified sea cave, California
body found in cave
Two snorkelers discovered a body in a La Jolla sea cave and reported
it to authorities. Lifeguards recovered the body of a Caucasian man in his
50s or 60s. A San Diego Fire-Rescue spokesman said "He was found on a
rock inside a cave and had street clothes on and was wearing a backpack
that had rocks in the side of the pack. The incident is being investigated
by the coroner as a possible suicide."
1. "Man's body found in La Jolla sea cave," La Jolla Light, 2 May 2011.
2. Michelle Mowad, "Body Found in Cave Appears to Be a Suicide," www.
lajolla.patch.com, 3 May 2011.
Comments: There were no reports if the man died in the cave or if
the body washed in from somewhere else.


********** 5 June
Sistema del Río Camuy, Puerto Rico
drowning
On Sunday, 5 June 2011, three workers from the company Original
Canopy Tours in Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, were installing a Tyrolean traverse
across the Río Camuy on private land near the Tres Pueblos entrance to
the Río Camuy Cave system. One of the men, 24-year-old Azgad Cardona
Martí, fell into the rain-swollen river while rigging a cable and was swept
away. Another man, 32-year-old Jorge León Rivera, went to his aid and
was also swept away. Cardona was rescued but León was washed into
the cave. Cave rescue personnel and other emergency responders were
called to the scene.
The cave, which is over 8 miles long, is very dangerous in high water
and has been the scene of several deaths in recent years. The safe work-
ing level of the river in the cave is considered to be 200 cubic feet per
second (cfs) but in this case the level was over 800 cfs. Rescuers decided
not to enter the cave until the water receded to a safe level, but more
rain was expected. Rescuers monitored areas downstream in the cave
via another entrance (Cueva Clara de Empalme), at the resurgence, and
by helicopter downstream along the river beyond the resurgence. The
search was eventually called off until Monday.
The river was still high on Monday so only minimal searching could
be done in the cave. Surface searches continued. On Tuesday, a flotation
test with a buoy was conducted to determine the possibility of someone
surviving such conditions. A team of cave divers made an attempt to
locate the missing man, without success. The water level was still higher
(314 cfs) than the safe limit.
Helicopter and all-terrain vehicle searches continued along the river
beyond the resurgence in case the body had been flushed out. One team
of cavers saw what might have been a body in the downstream section
of the cave but could not confirm it. Again bad weather forced an end to

---------- Page 22 ----------
the search. Finally on Wednesday, 8 June, the river was low enough and
a team of divers in Empalme found the body beneath 12 feet of water,
one-half mile downstream from where it entered the cave. Cavers rigged
a haul system and recovered the body, which was brought out of the cave
and identified by family members.
1. Efrain Mercado and Roberto Miranda, Accidente en Río Camuy,
Comisión Nacional de Rescate en Cuevas, June 2011. (this report contains
2012 Caving Accidents and Incidents


********** 2 January
Poleta Cave, California
stranded, aid, no injury
A 73-year-old man went caving by himself in the Inyo Mountains on
New Year's Day. When he did not return home in the evening, his wife
reported him missing. She had been to the cave before and provided direc-
tions to Inyo County Search and Rescue. After searching unsuccessfully
through the night, Inyo SAR called the China Lake Mountain Rescue Group
(CLMRG) who joined the search at 8:30 a.m. The rescue group found tracks
leading into a canyon, away from the wife's directions. A helicopter was
summoned to search the new area. From the air, a black duffel bag was
spotted lying next to a cave entrance. Rescue personnel made contact
with the man at 11:00 a.m. He had rappelled down the 50-foot vertical
entrance but left his ascending gear in the duffel bag above. When he
realized his predicament, he attempted to make prusiks out of his boot
laces but they broke when he weighted them. CLMRG group leader, David
Miles, rappelled down to him and found him unhurt. A 3:1 mechanical
advantage haul system was used to raise him to the surface.
1. John V. Ciani, "CLMRG rescues cave explorer," Daily Independent, 4
January 2012.
2. David Miles, email communication, 5 January 2012.
Comments: Miles reports the stranded man had a headlamp but
no helmet or gloves, and was using a climbing harness. This incident
highlights the decreased safety margin when caving alone, but at least
he had a good surface watch. It is somewhat ironic that what caused his
needing rescue - leaving his ascenders in a bag at the entrance - is also
what led rescuers to him. Besides this limestone cave, there are thousands
of mines in the area.


********** 8 January
Bone-Norman Cave System, West Virginia
lost, aid, no injury
Late on the night of 7 January 2012, three college students, Grant
Blaisdell (22), Matt Stephens (22), and Jay Buchina (23), entered the
Norman entrance of the Bone-Norman Cave System. The group intended
to camp underground for the night, then complete the through-trip out
the Bone entrance the next day. Although they had been caving a few
times before, they were not familiar with Bone-Norman, and had never
navigated in a cave of this length or complexity (the system is more than
14 miles in length).
It took the group approximately eight hours to reach their camp
site, including a trip to see some additional side passages. The men
were prepared to camp underground and were equipped with warm
clothing and sleeping bags. They established camp at around 5:00 a.m.
on 8 January. After sleeping for four hours, they started toward the Bone
entrance but were unable to find it after eleven hours of searching. They
assessed their situation, and decided that they did not have enough
batteries, food, or energy to make the five to six-hour trip back to the
Norman entrance. The group decided that they should return to the camp
several related news items)
Comments: It is important to note that the victim was attempting
to rescue his friend, who survived. While it may be a natural instinct to
rush to someone's aid, it is important that potential rescuers perform a
thorough scene-safety analysis before entering into hazardous conditions.
Failure to do so can result in additional casualties and complication of the
rescue effort, thereby exposing even more rescuers to danger.
site and wait for rescue.
Blaisdell's father knew of their plans, and according to some news
reports, was expecting him home by 7:00 p.m. on 8 January. The group
knew that a rescue would be initiated when they did not return. While
they waited, they left notes for the rescuers in the mud, and used orange
flagging tape to mark the route to their location. They also stayed in the
main passage so that they could easily be found.
The Renick Volunteer Fire Department, as well as cavers from
Morgantown, Charleston, and Virginia Tech responded. A search team
from Virginia Tech located the men at approximately 7:00 p.m. on 9
January, and escorted them safely out of the cave via the Bone entrance.
In total, the trio was in the cave for more than 48 hours.
Blaisdell was interviewed by several news organizations following
the rescue, and stated that he and his friends had learned a lot from this
experience. He said that he would like to continue caving, but would like
to learn from more experienced cavers first. He was highly appreciative
of the efforts of the rescuers involved, and said he is interested in getting
involved in cave rescue himself.
1. Jake Carpenter and Greg Seaby, "Rescuers Find 3 Alive in West Virginia
Cave," CNN, 9 January 2012.
2. Jeffery Alderton, "A lesson learned: Keyser cave explorer provides
account of rescue experience," Cumberland Times-News, 10 January 2012.
3. Doug Moore, "Norman Cave Incident," ICS Individual Log, 10 January
2012.
Comments: The group established a surface contact, who knew of
their plans and called for rescue when they did not return. They were also
prepared with warm clothing and sleeping bags, which likely prevented
hypothermia as they awaited rescue. Leaving notes and directional flag-
ging also helped rescuers to locate them quickly. More experience, and
additional planning for the trip (obtaining detailed directions and maps),
may have prevented the group from getting lost. If the cavers had carried
enough extra batteries and food to exit through the Norman entrance,
they also may have been able to leave the cave on their own after getting
some rest.


********** 14 January
Clarksville Cave, New York
intoxicated, aid, no injury
On a cold January day when the wind chill was near 0 °F, J. Heller
(29) and M. Lipari (47) decided to make a 23-mile trip on bicycles from
Troy, NY, to Clarksville Cave. Equipped with only flashlights and beer, the
duo entered the cave around noon. Also in the cave that day, Kay Rising
was leading a trip for ten beginners with help from David Rhodin, Bobby
Fabiano, and lan Bunk.
From the Lake Room, Rising led her group to exit the Thook Entrance
(one of the cave's three entrances). Fabiano and Rhodin had already
exited the cave via the Ward entrance when Rising, Bunk, and the rest
of the group reached the tight spot in Thook. One member of the party
was uncomfortable with this, so Rising left Bunk in charge of the others
while she led the young lady the short distance back through the cave

---------- Page 23 ----------
to the Ward entrance.
Along the way, Rising and her companion encountered Heller near
the Lake Room. He was lightly dressed, intoxicated, and carrying a flash-
light. She advised him to follow her out but he refused and wandered
off. A little further on she encountered Lipari, passed out amidst empty
beer cans and a flashlight. When she reached the surface, Rising informed
Rhodin and Fabiano of the two men in the cave and placed a call to 911.
Rhodin took hand warmers and a blanket in for Lipari while Fabiano
planned to search for Heller.
Meanwhile, Bunk and the rest of the group had also decided not to
exit via Thook and were making their way back through the cave when
they came across both men. Bunk and his companions were able to waken
Lipari, who was having difficulty moving and communicating. When ques-
tioned, Lipari said he could not remember the way out. The two men were
escorted out of the cave by Bunk and the others. After being evaluated
by paramedics, the two men were driven home by sheriff's deputies.
1. Thom Engle, Incident Report, 10 February 2012. (submitted by Chuck
Porter)
2. Kay Rising, email communication, 8 March 2012.
Comments: Thom Engle comments: "It is hard to tell what would
have happened had Kay and her group not been at the cave that day.
Considering the temperature of the cave (48 °F), which was only warm
relative to the outside, it is not too much of a stretch to surmise that both
men might have succumbed to hypothermia. As has been seen many
times, alcohol and cold temperatures do not mix."


********** 24 January
Schetromph Cave, Maryland
stuck, aid, no injury
Four young adults, all members and leaders of the Johns Hopkins
Outdoor Club, were exploring Schetromph Cave to determine its suitability
for future club outings. The group of two men and two women entered
the cave around 2:30 p.m. On their way out of the cave, one of the young
men prepared to negotiate a very tight and difficult section of the cave.
To exit required going headfirst down through a tight, hour-glass shaped
passage, making a 90-degree turn, and entering a body-sized "wormhole"
known as The Corkscrew.
Jerry Bowen explains, "What appears to have happened is approach-
ing the straight-down from a hands-and-knees crawl and with knees
on the lip, [the young man] lowered himself into the pit headfirst. He
missed grabbing his purchase, before he could straighten out a leg. It
was his left leg that got folded into his chest as if that knee were in a fetal
position." He was stuck at the pinch of the hour glass, completely upside
down, with his head on the ground. His female companions were able
to get under him but either did not have the strength or a long enough
reach to help him. After twenty minutes, they decided to call for help and
one of the party exited the cave and called 911.
A local resident heard the rescue being initiated over a scanner and
called his friend Jerry Bowen, an active caver. Jerry and his son Stephen
decided to make the twenty-minute drive to see if they could be of
help. They were stopped at two checkpoints but let through when they
displayed caving stickers and decals on their vehicle. They met with the
Maugansville Goodwill Volunteer Fire Department's Deputy Fire Chief
who quizzed them about their caving experience. Although neither of the
cavers had been in the cave, the Fire Chief was convinced they could be
of service. Until that point, no one on scene was small enough to reach
the trapped caver.
Since Stephen is smaller than Jerry, he was chosen to enter the cave.
He was given water, hearing protection for five people, eye protection,
an air quality meter, a gallon of chain-saw bar oil (for applying to the
patient's leg and back if needed), a compressed-air tank, hose, air chisel,
and a cloth bag to carry most of the items in. One of the females in the
group had emerged with a digital camera to show pictures of her friend's
predicament. She was now ready to escort Stephen into the cave and help
with carrying supplies.
When Stephen reached the trapped man, they were head to head.
There was a small void above the patient but Stephen was too tall to get
past him. He handed the bag of supplies to the patient's friend who was
able to give him water while Stephen went back for the air tank. When
the chisel was assembled, Stephen went to work, carefully removing
rock while trying not to injure the patient. Worried the chisel would slip,
Stephen had one of the friends radio out for a steel plate or some type
of shield for protection.
One of the females had already left the cave and surface support
eventually called for the second to exit as well. While the other male stayed
with the patient, the female and Stephen exited. Stephen retrieved a new
tank and the plate and headed back in, only to find the patient had slipped
further down, blocking access to the rock Stephen had been working on.
With his friend pulling on his free leg from above, and Stephen
pushing up on his shoulders from below, they managed to get him into a
position were chiselling could resume. After removing a final projection,
and freeing a caught pant leg, they pushed and pulled again, until the
leg popped free of the constriction. They radioed this information to the
surface which caused a great deal of excitement and relief. The freed caver
rested, drank some water, and then the threesome began making their
way toward the entrance. The patient was assisted up a 15-foot climb by
two confined-space professionals who met them in the cave, and he was
on the surface 15 minutes later at 10:00 p.m. He was flown to a hospital
but was found to have no sustaining injuries.
1. Dave McMillion, "Man rescued after being trapped in cave near Clear
Spring," Herald Mail, 24 January 2012.
2. Jerry Bowen, Incident Report, 19 February 2012.
3. Stephen Bowen, Incident Report, 19 February 2012.
Comments: Being stuck in a cave is a very dangerous predicament,
especially when the patient is in an inverted position. It was a stroke of
luck that the Bowens heard about the accident and responded when
they did. Approach tight passages with caution, and do not go in head
down if at all possible.


********** 1 March
Hidden River Cave, Kentucky
flooding, aid, no injury
On a sunny afternoon, eight teenage students and their teacher
entered Hidden River Cave for a three-hour, off-trail guided tour. Soon
after the group entered, a thunderstorm developed and dropped a large
amount of rain on the area. The tour group by now was far back in the
cave, and had no idea the water levels were rising. Hidden River Cave's
executive director, David Foster, and guide Joe Forsythe, measured the
water to be 3-feet deep and rising quickly. Foster and Forsythe made the
decision to enter the cave and try to bring the group out. According to
reports, Forsythe found the group 1 1/2 miles into the cave. He tied a line
to his waist and had the others hold onto it, walking when they could, and
swimming when they had to. Everyone made it out safely and the cave's
management says they are "re-assessing their tour protocol."
1. Rachel Markin, "Tour Group Rescued From Flooded Hidden River Cave,"
www.wbko.com, 1 March 2012.
Comments: Flooding in caves is never something to be taken lightly.
Before entering any cave with known flooding potential, obtain a reliable,
regional weather forecast for the cave's watershed; do not judge the
weather only by looking at the sky above you.
If cavers have reached a safe spot above possible flood levels, it is
often better to wait for floodwater to recede before attempting to exit.

---------- Page 24 ----------
Having emergency supplies stored in the cave at strategic sites can help
a forced bivouac to be safer and more comfortable.


********** 24 March
Crystal Ice Cave, California
caver fall, injury, no aid
During a guided tour of Crystal Ice Cave in Lava Beds National
Monument, a visitor fell approximately 10 to 15 feet off of a ledge he
was traversing. The visitor landed on a flat breakdown block then rolled
downhill, coming to rest face up among breakdown and ice. Two National
Park Service (NPS) guides were present. One of the guides immediately
left the cave to call for help. Two other persons on the trip were EMTs
who examined him and did a full spinal inspection of each vertebra. In a
sitting position, they continued the examination until everyone (including
the patient, who was also an EMT) felt that it was safe for him to stand
and begin moving. The group exited the cave just as law enforcement
rangers and other NPS employees arrived. The man was released after
an evaluation by an NPS EMT.
1. Shawn Thomas, Incident Report, 27 September 2012.
2. Shawn Thomas, email communication, 20 November 2012.
Comments: Thomas reports: "The patient was lucky to have sustained
only minor injuries, as the fall had the potential to be much more serious.
The patient was almost certainly spared from serious trauma or fatality
by wearing a properly fitted, UIAA* certified helmet. If evacuation had
been necessary, it would likely have been a prolonged rescue complicated
by moving a litter through a squeeze and out of a vertical entrance. The
cold temperature of the cave would have added a significant challenge
to the safety of the patient and rescuers."
*Union Internationale des Associations D'Alpinisme (International
Mountaineering and Climbing Federation)


********** 31 March
unspecified cave, Virginia
caught finger on rock projection, injury, no aid
After obtaining permission from the landowner, Adam Lake led a
group of seven cavers to a cave on private property. After exploring for
about four hours, the group decided to turn around. Doug Lake (43) was
the last to emerge from a narrow, winding passage into a larger room
were the rest of the group was waiting. Doug found adequate handholds
and began to pull himself up and out of the passage. As he did, his finger
caught on a chert nodule. Because of the intense pain, he concluded he
had broken his finger. Offers by the trip leader to splint and bandage the
injured finger were rejected. Doug rested for a few minutes, expressing
his discomfort "through a variation of the use of one four-letter word,"
which we can assume was not Ouch. Doug was able to exit the cave
without assistance.
1. Adam Lake, Incident Report, 4 April 2012.
Comments: It is good to know at least one person in the group had
a first aid kit.


********** 7 April
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
caver fall, injury and aid
Despite having a lot to do before Easter the following day, Pam
Greiner agreed to accompany her boyfriend and her two sons to Tumbling
Rock Cave. By the time the foursome had reached the Totem Gallery, a
mile and a half into the cave, the boys were getting tired but having a
great time "getting dirty." They decided to continue just a bit further to
see one more section of the cave. Greiner explains what happened next:
"As I was going down, attempting a controlled slide that would not take
me over the edge, something went wrong hit the ground, felt my upper
leg buckle, rolled onto the rocks, and felt so much nausea and pain that
I
wanted to pass out in fact I was fighting it with everything | had."
Greiner's boyfriend, who is an experienced caver with NCRC training,
quickly made her comfortable by giving her a pad to sit on, a garbage bag
for warmth, food, water, and extra batteries. Greiner told him "Get my
boys out of here safely. And, don't forget where I am." Her three loved
ones then headed out to get help while she kept her mind off her situa-
tion by playing Angry Birds on her iPhone. It was 3:40 in the afternoon.
Fortunately, Tumbling Rock Cave is a popular cave in the heart of TAG
(an area with thousands of caves where Tennessee, Alabama, and Georgia
meet), and help was quick to arrive. Other cavers, including one who is
a nurse, were also touring the cave and soon happened across Greiner.
They splinted her leg and wrapped her in a space blanket since she was
feeling quite cold. By 4:30 p.m. more individuals had arrived, and soon
there were about forty-five rescuers including members of the Huntsville
Cave Rescue Team, Jackson County Rescue Squad, Chattanooga Cliff and
Cave Rescue, and two EMTs from the University of Georgia preparing to
evacuate her from the cave. The property's manager, Jay Clark, was on
scene and reports that the rescue operation was well coordinated and
that Pam was out of the cave by 9:00 p.m.
1. Pam Greiner, "There are dark places and a light at the end of the cave
pamgreiner.blogspot.com, 9 April 2012.
2. Jay Clark, Incident Report, 11 April 2012.
Comments: Generally, injured persons in a cave should not be left
alone. If it is absolutely necessary, make sure they are as stable, warm,
and comfortable as possible, and leave them with plenty of light, food,
and water, as was done in this incident.


********** 8 April
Hidden Cave, California
trapped, fatality
On Sunday, 8 April, Guillermo Pino, Jr. (24), along with his friends and
family, visited Arroyo Tapiado in Anza-Borrego Desert State Park, in San
Diego County. This arroyo is a well-known pseudokarst area containing
over twenty "mud caves." Many of these caves are large enough to walk
through, and some have entrances, pits, or skylights that are unstable
and cannot be climbed safely.
Pino left his friends and went into Hidden Cave and exited the upper
entrance. He called to his companions who were at their campsite to bring
him his shoes and join him. He had not been wearing shoes and did not
have food, water, lights, or a cell phone. By the time his friends made it
to the top of the mesa, Pino had disappeared. When they could not find
him in the next several hours, they reported him missing.
The search for Pino began Sunday evening. Eventually the search
included sheriff's deputies from San Diego, Los Angeles, Riverside, and
San Bernardino Counties, as well as San Diego Mountain Rescue, San
Bernardino County Cave Rescue Team, Sierra Madre Search & Rescue,
US Border Patrol trackers, American Red Cross, Sycuan Fire Department,
and other rescue groups. All known caves were searched over the next
eight days.
Eventually, the San Diego Sheriff's Department called off the search,
but the Pino family continued to search and encouraged others to help.
When those searches failed, they hired a private investigator. Twenty-
seven days after Guillermo Pino's disappearance, the private investigator
lowered a video camera down a crack in Hidden Cave and found the
missing man. In the dark and without lights, Pino had crawled into a
tight passage and fallen about 30 feet. When cavers reached the victim,
he was wedged in the vertical crack and was buried up to his chest in
loose dirt and debris.
It took three days for a Los Angeles mine rescue team and cavers

---------- Page 25 ----------
to remove the body. One group dug from above and two groups from
below. An autopsy determined that Pino died of asphyxiation due to the
way his body was compressed in the crack. The coroner was not able to
determine time of death.
1. Susan Shroder, "Mine rescue team removes body in desert www.
utsandiego.com 8 May 2012.
2. Marcella Lee, "How mine rescue teams removed hiker's body from
mud caves," www.cbs8.com, 10 May 2012.
3. Art Fortini, Incident Report, 15 May 2012.


********** 13 April
Jewel Cave, South Dakota
caver fall, injury, no aid
Four cavers participated in a four-day camp trip in April of 2012.
For two of the participants, including MaryBeth Wells (24), it would be
their first camp trip in Jewel Cave. The second day in the cave was spent
exploring and surveying leads about an hour and a half from camp. At
about 10:30 p.m., Wells was climbing down a chimney when she slipped
and fell about 8 feet. She landed in a sitting position and momentarily
lost consciousness.
She was checked by a team member, certified as a Wilderness First
Responder, for signs of spinal or head injuries. Although very sore, she
was able to return to camp under her own power by taking small breaks
along the way. The team was back at camp by 3:00 a.m. and slept until
after noon the following day. Still very sore, Wells rested in camp while
the others continued surveying. The trip leader carried Wells' pack on the
fourth day and the team exited the cave without further incident. Wells
was later diagnosed with a sprained lower back.
1. Adam Weaver, Jewel Cave National Monument Trip Report, undated.
2. MaryBeth Wells, email communication, 10 December 2012.
Comments: A short fall is not an uncommon event for even the most
experienced of cavers. What is noteworthy about this incident is Wells'
momentary loss of consciousness, likely from acute stress reaction that
often occurs with trauma. When a caver is involved in an accident, or even
a close call, take precautions for acute stress reaction. Have the patient sit
down and rest, and when possible, move them to a safe location (away
from the edge of a pit, for example).


********** 5 May
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
rockfall, injury, no aid
Earl Suitor (54), his wife, Cheryl, and three other experienced cavers
led an educational trip to Sharps Cave for three novice cavers on 5 May
2012. The cavers provided the novices with the proper equipment and
briefed them on caving safety. A first aid kit and necessary equipment for
building a 3:1 haul system were available in the cavers' vehicles should
they be needed.
The group made it to Catfish Hall and climbed the breakdown slope
for a better look at the room. On the way down, one of the novices (26)
climbed over a slab of rock measuring 3 by 4 by 1 foot. As the rock began
to slide underneath her, she yelled for others to get out of the way. Earl
Suitor was a few feet below her as the rock came toward him. He tried
to push it away from him but it hit him on the left thigh, knocking him
backwards and causing a very large hematoma to the back and lateral
portion of his thigh, and a twisting of his ankle, knee, and hip joints. Suitor
pushed the still-moving rock away and it continued down the breakdown
slope. The novice had also sustained an injury to her hand but the group
decided they could continue with their trip.
A short time later, Suitor's injuries became more painful and the
group decided to exit the cave earlier than planned. Ice packs were
applied to the injuries upon exiting and Suitor later went for X-rays which
showed no broken bones. It was about five weeks before Suitor could
return to caving.
1. Earl Suitor, Incident Report, 22 June 2012.
Comments: Even in a heavily visited cave such as Sharps Cave,
unstable breakdown can still exist. A lack of experience by the novice
caver may have been a factor, but loose rocks can catch even the most
experienced caver off guard. Treat all breakdown with respect because,
as Suitor commented in his report, " once it begins to
move,
you're
not stopping it."


********** 9 May
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky
illness, fatality
William Martin (67) of Florida, was taking Mammoth Cave's Historic
Tour when he became ill and collapsed in River Hall. The tour guides called
the surface for assistance and began CPR. Emergency medical technician
rangers arrived twenty-five minutes later and used an external defibril-
lator on Martin. He was carried out on a stretcher and pronounced dead
by the Edmonson County Coroner.
1. Staff, "Mammoth Cave visitor dies on tour," The Courier-Journal, 9
May 2012.
2. Deborah Highland, "Florida man dies while touring Mammoth Cave,"
The Daily News, 10 May 2012.
Comments: This was the first death on a Mammoth Cave tour in
over twenty years.


********** 18 May
Wye Cave, lowa
2 people stuck, aid, no injury
Logan Eliasen (20) and Emma Thompson (20) entered Wye Cave in
Maquoketa Caves State Park around 7:00 p.m. while their friends remained
at a nearby campsite, having dinner. Both Eliasen and Thompson had
been in the cave several times before. While maneuvering through a tight
passage, Thompson became stuck and started experiencing panic attacks.
Eliasen, who had been leading, was able to turn around, hold her
hand for comfort, and give her his shirt for extra warmth. Another couple,
who happened to be in the cave, tried to help but eventually left to call
911. Rescue crews arrived and freed her in about thirty minutes. She
was taken to a hospital and treated for scrapes and bruises after being
stuck for four hours.
Meanwhile, when Eliasen tried to exit the passage he had been in
with Thompson, he too became stuck. His extraction did not proceed as
quickly, however. Rescue crews rotated personnel to Eliasen, as there
was only room for one rescuer at a time. As the hours went by, the stuck
man was fed power bars to keep up his energy and given an IV to prevent
dehydration. He was also fitted with an oxygen mask as the confined space
and use of air chisels were creating a concern for oxygen levels. Eliasen was
finally freed, 20 hours after venturing underground, exhausted but unhurt.
1. Sheri Melvold, "Rescuers free two from Maquoketa Caves," Quad-City
Times, 19 May 2012.
2. Kurt Allemeier, "Rescued man: just want people to know how grateful
I am,'" Quad-City Times, 21 May 2012.
Comments: Cavers learn through experience that some cave
passages are more difficult to negotiate in one direction than the other.
Plan accordingly.

---------- Page 26 ----------


********** 19 May
unspecified cave, Pennsylvania
difficulty on cable ladder, aid, no injury
Several caving and conservation organizations gathered for a field
meet near Blairsville, Pennsylvania, the weekend of 19 May 2012. Various
caving trips were planned, including one to a cave with a 38-foot-deep
entrance pit. The trip was not advertised as difficult or advanced and
seventeen people signed up for the trip, including at least four people
with very little to no experience in vertical or even basic caving techniques.
From the beginning, the inexperienced cavers had difficulty just getting
to the cave on the steep, one-hour hike uphill to the cave.
At the entrance, several people used a Goldline-rope belay to
descend the entrance drop on a cable ladder. After exploring the cave
without incident, the large group began to make their way up the cable
ladder one by one. Climbing the ladder gave the novices some trouble but
most made it out under their own power. One teenage boy was unable
to ascend after several attempts.
Despite the number of cavers on the trip, the vertical nature of the
entrance, and the fact that novices were on the trip, no rescue gear was
available. The Goldline rope was determined to be unsafe to use as a haul
line. A call was made using a cell phone and another group of cavers who
were working on a cave dig nearby responded. The youth was eventually
brought to the surface using a 1:1 haul system.
1. Andrew McKinnon, Incident Report, 7 June 2012.
Comments: Even experienced cavers are often surprised at how
difficult climbing a cable ladder can be. Trip leaders should be prepared
with the proper equipment to assist someone who has difficulty on rope
or a cable ladder.


********** 28 May
Thunder Canyon Cave, California
stranded, no consequence
Four off-duty Marines rappelled into Thunder Canyon Cave but were
then unable to exit. They managed to get a cell phone signal and call for
help. The local Sheriff's Department coordinated an effort to bring warm
blankets and other supplies that could be lowered to the Marines to keep
them comfortable overnight until a cave rescue team could arrive the next
day. When the deputies arrived at the cave, the four Marines had already
climbed out on their own.
1. Tony Perry, "4 Marines escape from deep cave in East County," www.
fox5sandiego.com, 29 May 2012.
2. Debbi Baker and Aaron Burgin, "Four Marines stuck in cave climb out
safely," www.utsandiego.com, 29 May 2012.
Comments: Like the 2011 Rustys Cave incident, this is another odd
exception to the rule that cell phones do not work in caves. It is also
interesting that people that were unable to exit became able to exit after
they had called for rescue.


********** 9 June
Shoveleater-Hellhole Cave System, West Virginia
rockfall, injury, no aid
Gayle Harman (24) was participating on a survey trip with other
members of the Germany Valley Karst Survey on 9 June 2012. At one
point, while crawling, she bumped the cave wall, dislodging a rock. The
rock fell onto her back and then rolled off onto her foot, causing her big
toe to swell and bruise. After a short break, the team slowly exited the
cave with other team members carrying her pack and gear. An X-ray later
showed she had fractured the tip of her big toe.
1. Gayle Harman, Incident Report, 15 June 2012.
Comments: Loose and unstable rocks can exist in even the most
frequented caves and cave passages. This can be particularly dangerous
in a crawlway as dislodging a rock may trap a caver beyond the collapse
or worse, the caver can be buried under the collapse.


********** 14 July
Sinking Cove Cave, Tennessee
stuck, aid, no injury
The Dogwood City Grotto's annual picnic trip to Sinking Cove Cave
took place on 14 July in 2012. The multi-drop cave is usually traversed as
a pull-down through-trip, but to accommodate three groups visiting on
this day, the cave was pre-rigged with fixed ropes.
Glenn Fell (31) was among six cavers in the first group. After complet-
ing the six drops, they entered a tight belly crawl with Fell bringing up the
rear. This was his second time in the cave, and on the trip a few years'
previous, he had had some difficulty in this section. A short way into the
crawl, Fell became wedged between the ceiling and floor. Three members
of the group had already exited the cave. When it became apparent he
could not free himself, one member stayed with Fell while the other left
for help.
The second group of cavers was making their way up the hill to the
upper entrance when they heard car horns sounding below them. They
went back down the hill to investigate and learned of Fell's predicament.
Five cavers then entered the cave from the bottom while two went in
through the top. When the cavers reached Fell through the crawl, they
found that one female caver, Rachel Erdman, was small enough to squeeze
past him on the side and get a loop of webbing around his feet. They also
put handcuff hitches around his wrists and, using a 4:1 haul system, Tim
White and Bil Davis began to pull.
Very little progress was made until Chuck Constable and Sara Kreps
arrived from behind. With Constable giving Fell something to push off
of, he was able to advance a few inches. It eventually became apparent
that assistance from behind was more beneficial so the haul system was
disassembled. Constable continued to provide support until Fell was able
to wiggle out of the tight spot.
1. Tim White, phone communication, 31 July 2012.
2. Glen Fell, email communication, 20 November 2012.
Comments: It is possible that that if one of Fell's companions had
been behind him in the crawl, he would have only been stuck for a few
minutes instead of over two hours. Unfortunately, half of his team exited
the cave without even knowing he was stuck. If a particular member of the
party might have trouble in a tight spot, it is a good idea to have others on
either side to offer assistance. If the party consists of only two, the smaller
caver should stay on the entrance side, in case they need to summon help.


********** 16 July
Glade Cave, Virginia
stuck, injury and aid
Various fire and rescue crews responded to assist a 14-year-old boy
who was reportedly stuck in Glade Cave. The youth was with a group of
about a dozen teenagers on a day trip from a local summer camp, although
it was not reported if any adults were present. The rescue operation took
over three hours and the boy was taken to the hospital for minor injuries.
1. Megan Williams, "Teen rescued from cave near Mount Solon," www.
newsleader.com, 16 July 2012.
2. Litsa Pappas, "Cave Stays Open after Teen Gets Trapped," www.whsv.
com, 17 July 2012.
Comments: The youth's name and his injuries were not made public.

---------- Page 27 ----------


********** 11 September
Southport Saltpeter (Millers) Cave, Tennessee
illness, aid, no injury
Darrell Smith (48) and three companions were taking a tour of the
privately owned Southport Saltpeter Cave when he suddenly became ill.
Two of his companions exited the cave and placed a call to 911 while the
guide and Smith's girlfriend stayed by his side. The responding emergency
crews were guided to Smith's location. After assessing his condition, they
carried him 1,000 feet back through the cave and up a 300-foot-high cliff.
He was then transported to Vanderbilt University Medical Center where
he was treated for a stroke.
1. Heather Graf, "Maury County Cave Rescue Requires Team Effort," www.
newschannel5.com, 12 September 2012.
Comments: When interviewed about the rescue, the Maury County
Fire Department's assistant chief said, "Once you get into any space that's
not made for human occupancy, you start worrying about an oxygen-
deficient atmosphere, so we're having to monitor that." This is a great
example of rescuers, not specifically trained in cave rescue, confusing
caves with a confined space, and treating them as such. Monitoring atmo-
spheric conditions is not a bad idea, unless it slows or otherwise hampers
a rescue effort where it is not needed. For this reason, local rescue crews
should be invited to cave rescue trainings whenever possible, fostering
a good working relationship between cave rescuers and local agencies.


********** 8 November
Kaumana Cave, Hawaii
caver fall, injury and aid
Long-time caver Fred Stone (73) and Deborah Ward attempted to
enter Kaumana Cave through a 15-foot-deep dry well. The top of the
well has an 8-foot-high concrete sleeve to protect the well from run-off.
Access down the inside of the sleeve is via metal steps to a metal grid at
the bottom. Stone climbed down to the bottom of the sleeve and secured
the metal grid open with one end of a 5/16-inch-diameter rope. With the
other end of the rope, he tied a cable ladder to a metal step in the concrete
sleeve using a (improperly tied) bowline knot. Stone crawled under the
grid and put his weight on the cable ladder. The knot immediately came
loose, and Stone fell 15 feet to the bottom.
Ward witnessed the fall and said she would call for help. Stone,
however, told her "she absolutely should not call for help," and that "he
just needed to catch his breath, and that Ward should haul up the ladder,
re-tie it and let him climb out." The ladder however had fallen a short ways
and caught on something where Ward could not reach it. Stone's foot
was also caught in the ladder. He tried to free his foot, but found he was
unable to move his legs. He was also bleeding profusely. Both cavers now
realized that help was indeed needed. The well, fortunately, is located right
next to a road so Ward was able to reach her cell phone within minutes.
The location of the incident was only 2 miles from a medical center
so help arrived quickly. Stone was placed in a litter, lifted from the well,
and taken by ambulance to the emergency room where he spent several
hours with a trauma team before being air lifted to Honolulu for surgery.
Stone suffered scrapes and cuts to his elbows, shoulders, and face; broken
ribs, a concussion, and two fractured vertebrae in his neck.
1. Fred Stone, Incident Report, 29 December 2012.
Comments: In his report, Stone confesses that not only did he tie a
faulty bowline, but he failed to double-check the knot and its integrity.
He continues to say the lessons to be learned from this incident include:
"Always double-check knots. Always use a belay with cable ladders." This
is good advice, even for cavers with many years of experience.
It should also be noted that although Stone and Ward had a lengthy
conversation after the incident, Stone has no recollection of it due to his
concussion.


********** 11 November
Pachidream Cave, British Columbia, Canada
lost control on rappel, injury, no aid
A group of five cavers entered the multi-drop Pachidream Cave for
a day of exploring. A short distance into the cave, they encountered a
60-foot-deep pit. The first three cavers rappelled without incident. The
fourth caver rigged into the rope with a Verso (ATC-like) belay device. He
then used a Bachmann hitch attached to the rope above the descender
as a backup. As he started his rappel, his feet slipped and he instinctively
reached for the wall, removing his one hand from the belay device. His
other hand gripped the Bachmann hitch even more tightly, preventing it
from grabbing the rope. He fell the rest of the way but managed to land
on his feet. Other than rope burns to his hands, he was unhurt.
1. "Falling during rappel," www.cavechat.org, 13 November 2012.
Comments: The cause of this incident was the caver letting go with
his brake hand. The backup device, the Bachmann hitch, failed to catch
because the caver then instinctively gripped it tighter. These types of
backup devices are often criticized for this very reason. In his report the
caver sates, "What should have been a backup to my belay device was
not functioning in my time of need, because I was holding onto it. Do you
know how difficult it is to let go when you are already falling?"


********** 12 November
Climax Cave, Georgia
caver fall, injury and aid
At the end of a hour trip in Climax Cave, nine cavers were making
their way up a series of three climbs in the entrance. The three pitches
are all free-climbable and total about 25 feet. The lowest climb is called
the Wet Chimney, due to its taking water during rain events, and had
been pre-rigged with a 9mm rope for a handline. As one female caver
was making her way up the Wet Chimney, with her husband spotting her
from below, she slipped and fell backwards. Her fall was slightly arrested
by her husband but she struck her elbow on rock, breaking her arm.
After an initial assessment, the trip leader exited the cave and
called Climax Fire and Rescue. Meanwhile, the injured caver was able
to make it the rest of the way up the chimney with minimal assistance
from others. Once out of the cave, another person in the group retrieved
a caving harness from his vehicle and the injured caver was belayed up
the 90-foot-deep sinkhole by Climax Fire and Rescue.
1. Tevis Kouts, Incident Report, 14 November 2012.
2. Tevis Kouts, email communication, 14 November 2012.
3. Chris Hudson, email communication, 15 November 2012.
Comments: The trip leader noted that the incident could have been
handled as a self rescue. Due to the nature of the injury, and the distance
to get to a phone, however, the team decided to initiate a request for assis-
tance, in case the injury turned out to be more debilitating than expected.
The decision of whether or not to self rescue can sometimes be
difficult. In this case, the caver was strong enough to continue with mini-
mal assistance from her team. This greatly reduced the amount of time
and resources needed for evacuation. Having the extra manpower at the
sinkhole further expedited the operation.

---------- Page 28 ----------


********** 18 November
Pettijohns Cave, Georgia
caver fall, injury and aid
A 21-year-old woman needed rescuing from Pettijohns Cave when
she "fell and sprained her foot really bad." The woman was part of a group
from Woodstock, Georgia, who planned for a day of rock climbing but
decided to go caving instead.
At least 35 personnel responded to the incident, including a group
of Venture Scouts who were in the area. The woman was assisted up
steep areas with a harness and haul system, and assisted by rescuers the
rest of the way.
1. Matt Ledger, "Injured woman rescued from cave in Walker County,"
www.walkermessenger.com, 20 November 2012.
2. Nicholas Persac, "Venture Scouts help rescue woman trapped in Ga.
cave," www.theadvertiser.com 22 November 2012.
Comments: A predetermined rescue plan developed for the cave
by Walker County Emergency Services aided this quick and efficient
four-hour rescue.
2012 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents


********** 15 February
Merritts Mill Pond, Florida
2 people stuck, aid, no injury
Edd Sorenson was teaching a scuba diving class at Merritts Mill Pond
when another instructor surfaced, shouting for help. Two student divers
were stuck and the instructor could not find them in the zero visibility.
Sorenson changed from street clothes into his diving gear in just a few
minutes. After searching for fifteen minutes, he heard a sound and was
eventually able to locate one of the students. Sorenson took him to a
safer spot, calmed him down, and told him to wait. The other student
was then found and both were escorted to the surface.
1. Deborah Buckhalter, "Diver recalls Blue Springs rescue," Jackson County
Floridan, 17 March 2012.
Comments: It was reported that the students were wearing double
back-mount tanks instead of single side-mounted tanks, which caused
them to get stuck. Very few cave-diving incidents end in a successful
rescue. These two students were very lucky that Edd Sorenson was on
scene.


********** 17 March
Vortex Spring, Florida
fatality
Larry Higginbotham (43) planned a dive of Vortex Spring on a
Saturday morning. When he did not return, his girlfriend notified authori-
ties. Higginbotham's body was recovered the next day.
1. Cecilia Spears, "Mississippi diver dies at Vortex Spring," www.news-
herald.com, 20 March 2012.
Comments: No other information was provided.


********** 1 December
Fricks Cave, Georgia
caver fall, injury, no aid
A group of seven cavers entered Fricks Cave for a day of surveying.
Several hours into the trip, Clinton Kahl slipped and fell while attempting
to climb up a muddy slope to an upper-level passage. Members of his
team heard his ankle make a popping sound when he landed. Despite
being in pain, and his ankle swelling, Kahl was able to make it out under
his own power.
1. Nancy Aulenbach, "Frick's Cave Survey Trip Report," Tag-Net Digest
#6411, 11 December 2012.
2. Buford Pruitt, "Underground Online," NSS News, vol. 71, no. 3, March
2013.
Comments: Experienced cavers, who are more skilled and confident
in the underground environment than novices, will often choose to self-
rescue rather than call for outside assistance when possible. A discussion
on the pros and cons of self-rescue is given in the National Cave Rescue
Commission's Manual of US Cave Rescue Techniques, Chapter 33: Small
Party Rescues.


********** 18 March
Devils Eye Spring, Florida
fatality
An open water diver, with no cave diving training, was found
deceased in the Catacombs section of Devils Eye Spring. Open water divers
are not allowed to use lights at this site in order to discourage them from
leaving the daylight zone. The Catacombs is well out of the daylight zone,
and not in the main passage. There is no permanent guide line in that area.
1. "Death at Ginnie 3-18-12," www.cavediver.net, 19 March 2012.
Comments: No other information is available.


********** 31 March
Weeki Wachee Springs, Florida
embolism, fatality
Marson Kay (29), an experienced cave diver, was performing a series
of dives with the Karst Underwater Research (KUR) team at Weeki Wachee
Springs. As he was exiting the cave, Kay left the dive line and swam up
into a narrow crevice where he became stuck.
A post on KUR's Facebook page explains, "Instead of following the
ropes as he had done multiple times in the past, Marson rapidly moved into
a highly restrictive area of the crevasse (sic). It is believed that this behavior
was not a calculated decision but a reaction caused by the affects (sic) of
an embolism he incurred while rapidly ascending from depth. According
to the coroner's evaluation, Marson developed a cerebral arterial gas
embolism prior to his death. Typically, this condition causes profound
changes in mental functioning including disorientation, blindness, paraly-
sis, seizures and loss of consciousness within minutes or even seconds of
onset. If it occurs after surfacing, it is often fatal or profoundly disabling
even with prompt recompression therapy; when it occurs underwater, the
incapacity or unconsciousness it causes almost always results in drowning.
"Although safety divers were in visual contact and additional safety gas
cylinders were in place, he rapidly pushed himself upward into an area
where even side-mount divers could not easily access. Several attempts

---------- Page 29 ----------
were made to communicate, by means of light signals as well as touch
contact. Although Marson was still moving at this time, he did not directly
respond to these communication attempts. After approximately 5 minutes,
divers reported Marson was no longer utilizing his regulator. A subsequent
review of his equipment indicated that Marson had approximately half of
his gas supply remaining in both of his tanks and his regulators appeared
to be working properly."
A rescue team was deployed minutes later but by then he was
unresponsive. He was brought to the surface shortly before 5:00 p.m.
1. "Diving Fatality at Weeki Wachee Springs," www.cavediver.net, 2 April
2012.
2. Tony Holt, "Diver died from embolism," Hernando Today, 5 April
2012.


********** 19 April
Sistema Chac Mool, Quintana Roo, Mexico
3 fatalities, drowning
A Spanish guide led a newly wed Brazilian couple on a cavern dive in
the popular Cenote Chac Mool one hour before closing time. Although the
trio had not surfaced by closing time, several hours passed before authori-
ties were notified. Shortly before 2:00 a.m. on 20 April, the three bodies
were discovered 80 meters from the surface (about an 8-minute swim).
Although this was to be a cavern dive, the bodies were found well
into the dark zone which is off limits to cavern divers. The guide and the
couple were all found facing into the cave, only a few feet from a dive line.
The Brazilian man still had air in his tank but his wife and guide did not.
1. Fernando Del Valle Prieto, Accident Report at Cenote Chac Mool, 19
April 2012.
2. "Divers drown at Playa del Carmen cenote," mexicogulfreporter
blogspot.com 20 April 2012.
3. "Triple Fatality in Chac Mool yesterday (4/19/12)," www.cavediver.
net, 20 April 2012.
Comments: The guide was not certified to lead cave diving trips and
his clients were not cave divers either. It has been reported, though, that
local cavern dive guides often have to be "chased" out of the cave zone
by cave divers at this particular location.


********** 21 July
Big Blue Spring, Florida
fatality, stuck, drowning
J. Joshua Cox and a friend planned a day of open water diving in the
Big Blue area of Wacissa River. When Cox failed to surface, his dive buddy
called for help. Divers reporting to the scene found Cox had entered a small
cave at the bottom of the basin. He was beyond one tight constriction,
wedged top and bottom in another. What followed was a very dangerous
body recovery for three divers.
To reach the body, Edd Sorensen, Chris Wickman, and Mathew
Bull first attempted to enlarge the constriction by moving a boulder.
The boulder moved, but instead of enlarging the constriction, it made it
impassable. An alternative, but even more difficult way to the victim was
located and after removing some gear, Sorensen and Bull were able to
reach and dislodge the body. By now the body was very negative (wanting
to sink). The victim was wearing fins, a wetsuit, mask, and had one light.
His tank was floating near the ceiling, still with 500 psi.
On their next dive, Sorensen and Bull went back through the constric-
tion while Wickman waited on the other side. Because rigor mortis had set
in, Sorensen and Bull had to strap the victim's arms down in order to get
him through the restriction. They also fitted a rope harness around him
and passed a tether from this out to Wickman. Bull then joined Wickman
on the outside of the constriction. With the two of them pulling, and
Sorensen pushing and manipulating the body from behind, they were
eventually able to complete the extrication.
Sorensen was quoted by the press as saying: "I never take anybody
with me when I do a body recovery because of the danger and the chance
of a zero-visibility situation. I don't want to lose (the other person). Today
I had to have the muscle of extra very experienced cave divers."
1. "J Joshua Cox perishes in Big Blue Spring on the Wacissa River," www.
cavediver.net, 21 July 2012.
2. Jordan Culver, "Body of diver recovered after 'extremely difficult'
operation," www.tallahassee.com, 22 July 2012.
3. Mathew Bull, email communication, 25 September 2012.
Comments: Cox was not a certified cave diver and his dive buddy
that day says they had explicitly decided not to enter the cave. It appears
that Cox removed his tank to push it ahead of him when he decided for
unknown reasons to enter the restriction. His gear was not tethered to him
and he probably dropped it when he became stuck, causing him to drown.
Rescues and recoveries are dangerous enough in air-filled caves. They
are far more dangerous in water-filled caves and should only be attempted
by the most qualified divers. Even then, the risks versus benefit should
be considered thoroughly.


********** 7 August
Twin Caves, Florida
lost, aid, no injury
Andrea Rance, Jamie Rance, and Samer Lawand were completing a
dive of Twin Caves and finishing their last safety stop when three divers
swam by them into the cave. The first, a young lady (22), was stirring up a
lot of silt by flutter kicking. She was followed by her father and a brother
(19). The Rances were able to reach their gold line just before the visibil-
ity went to zero. Moments later, Andrea felt the brother from the other
group brush by her, heading for the surface. The Rances then surfaced,
followed by Lawand who exited from a nearby entrance.
The divers asked the young man, who was an open water diver,
why they had gone into the cave. The young man replied it was all right
because his father was a dive instructor. The father then surfaced but the
daughter did not. All of the divers began looking for the cave entrance but
could not locate it in the zero visibility. The entrances are in an artificial,
10-foot-deep "pond" made by a dam. Six feet below the bottom of the
pond is a small sinkhole. The "twin" entrances are at the bottom of this
sinkhole and cannot be seen once silt has been stirred up.
Fortunately, Lawand's wife, Karen Brinkman, was waiting for them
on a pontoon boat, with a charged cell phone. She was able to find Edd
Sorensen's phone number and call him. He was teaching a dive class
nearby and arrived in twenty minutes.
The father told Sorensen where he had last seen his daughter and
Sorensen went in to look for her. Ten minutes later, Sorensen surfaced
with the daughter who was cold and tired but otherwise unhurt. After
she had become separated from her family, she found an air bell where
she could breathe to conserve the air in her tanks. Twice she swam away
from it, looking for the exit but had to return to it both times. Sorensen
found her in the air bell and asked if she was OK. She replied she was, so
he had her hold his arm as he led her safely to the surface.
1. "Edd Sorenson saves the day, again!!," www.cavediver.net, 7 August
2012.
2. Andrea Rance, email communication, 15 August 2012.
Comments: The reporting of this incident on CaveDiver.net gener-
ated a lot of discussion and speculation as to how a father/open water
dive instructor could lead his children into such a situation. One month
later, the father wrote a response and emailed it to the CaveDiver forum's

---------- Page 30 ----------
moderator for posting.
In his response, the father assumes full responsibility for the events
that transpired that day and analyzes the chain of events that led to the
incident. These actions include not getting enough information about
their intended dive site, and not properly communicating with his son
and daughter about the intended dive plan. When he asked his daughter
later why she had entered the cave she responded, "Dad, I'm sorry that
I
acted like a dare-devil. But all I could think was this was my last dive of
the year. So, I just went for it."
The father then makes an interesting analogy between this and the
majority of snow skiing accidents taking place on the last run on the last
day of the trip or season. He concludes his response with the realization
that
as her father I had conditioned a false sense of invincibility when
she dived with me." This last comment is something all responsible trip
leaders should consider.


********** 15 October
Blue Springs, Florida
diver lost, out of air, stranded, aid, no injury
According to many divers, before 2012, only four successful rescues
of cave divers have ever occurred. Yet, on 15 October 2012, Edd Sorensen
saved a fourth cave diver that year.
A group of four cave divers entered Blue Springs that day, and made
a wrong turn from their planned route. Three of the divers were able to
2012 Caving-Related Accidents and Incidents


********** 4 February
dirt cave, California
trapped by collapse, fatality
Two 11-year-old boys were enlarging a small dirt cave in a creek bed
when it collapsed. One of the boys was able to escape and ran for help.
The other remained buried from his legs to his head until two adults dug
him out. They performed CPR until further assistance arrived and the boy
was taken to a local medical center. He was then flown to the Children's
Hospital in San Diego in critical condition. He did not survive.
1. Brian Rokos, "Boy buried in cave-in still critical," The Press Enterprise,
6 February 2012.
2. Brian Rokos, email communication, 8 March 2012.
Comments: Whether in a creek bed or a cave, digging can be a very
hazardous endeavor. A person buried under even a small amount of dirt
can be difficult to rescue as shifting dirt can rebury the victim as fast as
he or she is uncovered.


********** 5 February
Breathing Hole Cave, Indiana
suicide
Indiana caver, Kevin Eve (25), was reported missing on 1 October
2011. His vehicle was found two days later in the Wyandotte Woods
State Forest. Eve was familiar with many of the caves in the area and had
reportedly been working on a few dig projects before the state closure
of caves due to White-nose Syndrome. A search was begun of the woods
and nearby caves, although other possibilities for his disappearance were
considered. Eve was an Iraq War veteran and may have been suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Concerns that he may have
been suicidal or faked his disappearance in order to start a new life else-
where were considered.
Hundreds of volunteers assisted authorities, hoping to find him
exit, but when the fourth did not surface, they called Cave Adventures.
Sorensen, the owner of the dive shop, and his manager Frank Gonzalez,
grabbed their rescue gear and headed to the scene. With Sorensen driv-
ing (admittedly well above the speed limit), and Gonzalez lying in the bed
of the truck putting together gear, they reached the dive location and
Sorensen was in the water only eleven minutes after receiving the call.
Sorensen found the lost diver, who had already run out of air but
managed to find a very small air pocket. The diver knew with the carbon
dioxide building up in the pocket that he would not survive long. When
Sorensen found him, he likely had only a few minutes left of air. He was
brought safely to the surface a half hour later.
1. "Divers missing in the mill pond," www.cavedivers.net, 15 October
2012.
2. Kelsey Peck, "Another Cave Diving Rescue At Blue Springs," www.wmbb.


********** com, 16 October 2012
3. Bergen Baucom, "Marianna's Own 'Aquaman': One Cave Diver's
Miraculous Rescue and the Man Who Saved Him," www.wjhg.com, 16
October 2012.
4. Steve Cushman, email communication, 29 October 2012.
Comments: In January 2013, the Aquatic Science Association
presented Sorensen with the Edd Sorensen Award. This award will be
given annually to "a person who demonstrates the quality of outstand-
ing achievements."
alive. After a week, the search began to focus on just finding his body.
In his incident report, Anmar Mirza explains: "The high probability caves
were checked several times, and the fact that all of the caves on the state
property had been closed for three years both aided and hindered the
search. It aided it in that since there had been so little traffic in many of
the caves it was possible to eliminate them readily because they showed
clear evidence of not having seen traffic in months to years. It hindered
the search because the pool of cavers who were familiar with the caves
in that area has dwindled markedly, and now what caving activity there
is tends to be highly secretive with information not readily available."
On 5 February 2012, a group of amateur cavers made an illegal trip
to Breathing Hole Cave. In a remote section of the cave, they discovered
a body. Fearing they would get in trouble for visiting the cave, which is
officially closed, they waited until returning home to alert authorities.
Indiana Department of Natural Resources Law Enforcement Officers
entered the cave that evening and confirmed that a body with a shotgun
lying nearby was found. The body and evidence was bagged and cavers
with rescue experience were called to help with the evacuation. The cavers
arrived on scene around midnight.
Through the night, cavers transported the body through a river
passage, up short climbs and steep slopes. One rescuer received minor
injuries when she slipped on unstable breakdown but was able to exit
the cave under her own power. Constrictions and loose breakdown in the
entrance series eventually brought progress to a standstill. By 4:00 a.m.,
no progress had been made for two hours. The cold, wet, tired cavers
exited the cave for some rest and rehabilitation.
Later that morning, cavers experienced in "rock modification" arrived
to enlarge the worst of the constrictions. The evacuation resumed and
the body was brought to the surface at 6:00 p.m. February 6. Further
investigation confirmed that the body was Kevin Eve.
1. Drew Douglas, "Body Found In Cave Identified As Missing Spelunker,"
www.WLKY.com, 7 February 2012.
2. Anmar Mirza, Incident Report, 2 August 2012.

---------- Page 31 ----------
Comments: Mirza concludes his report with these comments:
any cave rescue event, even a body recovery, places responders at risk
and creates emotional stress for everyone involved from the family on to
the searchers and the people tasked with recovering the body. Technically
speaking this was not a caving accident as the death and location were
intentional, but it had significant impact on the caving community as a
whole. We are glad the Eve family was able to find some of the answers
and what we could do to help was gladly given. We would beg of anyone
who is troubled to seek help, the caving community is full of people who
care and we take care of our own."


********** 19 April
unspecified cave, Arizona
fell hiking to cave, injury and aid
Graham Schindel (24) was hiking to a remote cave when a rock ledge
he was traversing broke free. He fell about 20 feet and landed on his side.
Schindel suffered a broken wrist and two, very deep puncture wounds to
his back and abdomen. One puncture, 6 inches deep, was caused by an
agave. The other was caused by a rock and was about 3 inches deep. His
companions were able to help him back to their vehicles where Schindel
turned on his SPOT personal tracker. He was transported by helicopter
to a hospital.
1. Geary Schindel, email communication, 21 April 2012.
2. Graham Schindel, email communication, 22 May 2012.
Comments: Sometimes just getting to or returning from a cave can be
the most hazardous part of caving. After this incident, each of Schindel's
companions also purchased SPOT locator devices.


********** 13 May
unspecified sinkhole, Indiana
dog stranded in sinkhole
An Indiana Conservation Officer rescued a coon dog named MoMo
from a 20-foot-deep sinkhole early on a Sunday morning. The dog had
gone missing the previous Friday night during a raccoon hunt. The owner
and two other hunters heard the dog barking while searching for it on
Saturday and called police. An Indiana Conservation Officer carried MoMo
up a ladder to the surface. MoMo was unhurt and very excited to be back
with his owner.
1. The Associated Press, "Ind. conservation officer rescues hunting dog
from sinkhole; dog was trapped more than a day," 13 May 2012.


********** 23 May
Fools Crawl, New York
dog stranded in cave
Another dog needed rescuing this month, this time a pit bull named
Yale. Yale had been hiking with his people at Thacher Park when the group
stopped to look into Fools Crawl. Here, Yale pulled away and ran into the
cave, disappearing about noon. Yale's owners contacted park authorities
who then called Thom Engle. Engle called Emily Davis and Mike Warner
who arrived at the cave shortly before 3:00 p.m. Davis put on a wetsuit
and entered the cave carrying dog treats. She encountered Yale about
300 feet in, but when the dog began growling and showing his teeth, she
decided to back out.
Since the owner was about the same size as Warner, Davis had
him put on Warner's gear and enter the cave with her. They found Yale
another 100 feet further into the cave. He was so happy to see his owner
he practically dragged him out of the cave. Everyone was out by 4:00 p.m.
1. Emily Davis, "Cave rescue report," email communication, 23 May 2012.
Comments: This was the first caving trip for both Yale and his owner,
and certainly one to remember. The incident also provided the park an
opportunity to meet local cavers and discover that cave rescue resources
are available should they need them in the future.


********** 23 May
sinkhole, New York
calf stranded in sinkhole
Shortly after returning home from rescuing a dog in a cave, Emily
Davis received an email asking for assistance with a 10-day-old calf that
had fallen into a sinkhole - what are the odds? Davis and Mike Warner
arrived at the scene and were joined by Jay Siemion and Ken Fortuin.
Davis worked her way down a 25-foot-deep fissure and found the calf
standing at the bottom unharmed. Fortuin joined her and tied the calf's
legs with a rope and then hoisted it out. The calf was then carried in a
bucket loader to a nearby field where its mother came running to greet
it. The little calf was later named Splunk.
1. Emily Davis, "cave rescue redux," email communication, 24 May 2012.
Comments: The calf's owner was very appreciative and rewarded
the rescue team with, ironically, grass-fed beef.


********** 30 May
unspecified cave, Tennessee
dog stranded in cave
Peanut, a pug and Chihuahua mix, had not been reading the news
reports of other dogs recently stranded in caves and ran into a Tennessee
cave in pursuit of a small critter. Like the other canines, Peanut refused
to come out even after several days of her people calling to her. Curtis
Winiger, a Kingsport paramedic, wormed his way through a tight, muddy,
belly crawl to reach Peanut four days after she had entered the cave. The
pooch and her family were very happy to be reunited.
1. Rain Smith, "Kingsport paramedic rescues dog stranded in cave 4 days,"
www.johnsoncitypress.com, 30 May 2012.
Comments: Apparently one trick you can't teach an old dog is how
to find its way out of a cave.


********** 16 June
Whipple Cave, Nevada
cavers assist rock climber, aid, no injury
A group of Utah cavers were practicing rescue techniques at the
entrance pit of Whipple Cave in Nevada, when a group of Utah boy scouts
arrived to practice climbing. The scout leaders were having the scouts
rock climb out of the pit instead of using ascenders. Several did not have
helmets. The scouts had rigged a top rope but, about 10 feet from the top,
climbers had to traverse several feet to a handline to complete the climb
out. If a climber failed to complete the traverse, they would pendulum
back until the top rope caught them.
One scout leader reached the traverse and could not continue due
to exhaustion. The cavers rigged an etrier so that he could stand in it
and rest. The rest period did not help and he was still unable to continue
climbing, complete the traverse, or down climb. While one caver who was
already on rope during a rescue exercise assisted the scout leader from
below, another caver anchored himself and was able to assist from above.
Together they helped the scout leader finish his climb out of the cave.
1. Jeff Baird, Incident Report sent to Utah National Parks Council (a council
of the Boy Scouts of America), undated.
Comments: Baird reports that the climb was poorly set up for the

---------- Page 32 ----------
scouts. The top rope was placed so that it could not be used for the entire
climb. The climbers had to traverse to a handline to exit the cave. If a
climber fell during the traverse, they would pendulum back, which would
be especially dangerous for those not wearing helmets. The handline was
redirected at 90 degrees around an unstable rock such that if the rock
moved, anyone on the handline would also pendulum. Also, those persons
standing at the lip between the pit and the handline would be knocked
down the 60-foot-deep pit. Baird and his group remained at the cave until
they were satisfied that all of the scouts had exited safely.


********** 24 June
Secret Caverns, New York
fawn stranded in cave
Who knew New York caves could be so enticing to animals? On June
24, a fawn needed rescuing from the Ice Cave entrance of Secret Caverns.
Scott Keefer took a rope and duffle bag and found the fawn after crawling
100 feet into the cave. Keefer explains: "I took the rope, full-nelsoned the
deer, and looped it up around the back and made a handle so I could carry
him. Put the bag over his head and pulled him back out. On the outside
some other guys pulled on the rope to get him up and out of the 30-foot
groups/27864331/1628325727/name/Reporte_Operativo_Atlalaquia.pdf
drop. No broken bones, and we released him shortly thereafter in some
tall grass
" Keefer was assisted by the cave's owner, R.J. Mallery, and
two guests of the cave, Steve and Mac.
1. Steven Millet, "yet another animal rescue in NY," email communica-
tion, 25 June 2012.
2. Scott Keefer, email communication, 23 July 2012.
Comments: Carrying a baby deer out of a cave may sound like an
adorable rescue, but remember, wild animals are unpredictable and can
be dangerous. This little fawn tried very hard to get away from Keefer,
cutting itself on the limestone walls as it jumped about, looking to escape.


********** 14 August
storm drain, New York
flooding, aid, no injury
A husband, wife, and their 24-year-old daughter were hiking in the
Genesee Gorge when they entered a storm drain in pursuit of a geocache.
While they were underground, a heavy rainstorm passed through the area.
Water rose quickly in the storm drain and the family became afraid they
would be washed out of the cave and down to the river, 70 feet below.
The family was able to get a cell phone call from inside as the water rose
to waist level. Members of the Rochester Fire Department's rope rescue
team rappelled 40 feet down to the entrance. The family was calm and
unhurt and they were hauled up the embankment one by one. The smooth
rescue operation was attributed to extensive training in the gorge by the
rope rescue team.
1. Mark Gruba, "Cave Rescue in Genesee River Gorge," www.rochester-
homepage.net 15 August 2012.
2. Lynette Adams, "Firefighters talk about Tuesday cave rescue," www.
whec.com, 15 August 2012.
3. Sean Carroll, "Three Hikers Rescued From Cave Were Geocaching,"
www.13wham.com. 16 August 2012.
4. Joe Giunta, email communication, 16 September 2012.
5. Michael Elio, email communication, 26 September 2012.
Comments: Note that every news report describes this incident as a
cave rescue. Local cavers have confirmed that while this feature may have
started as a natural drain, it is actually a tunnel built in 1931 during the
construction of Route 104's Veteran's Memorial Bridge. Fast-rising water
can trap persons in natural caves as well as storm drains. Always check
the weather forecast before heading underground.


********** 19 August
Atlalaquia de Atikpak, Puebla, Mexico
drowning
Efraín Martínez Martínez (19) was swept away by the current of
a rain-swollen river and washed into Atlalaquia de Atikpak (Sumidero
Atlalaquia) in Alcomunga, Ajalpan, Puebla, Mexico. A week later, a
recovery team from Espéleo Rescate México (Mexican Cave Rescue)
still harbored hopes that he might be found alive, despite unsuccessful
recovery attempts by other groups.
Technical rigging was required to enter the cave due to the high
water levels. About 600 feet into the cave, they found the lifeless body
of Martínez, nine days after he disappeared. The river flowing into the
cave continued rising even as the recovery operation took place, requiring
additional rigging for safety and to extract the body. Local people helped
carry the stretcher with the body away from the cave.
1. Translated and abstracted by Mark Minton from "Reporte
Operativo Sumidero Atlalaquia, Sierra Negra, Puebla, 17, 18 y 19 de
agosto de 2012," Espéleo Rescate México, http://xa.yimg.com/kq/


********** 1 December
Double Sinks, New Mexico
murder victim found in cave
When a University of New Mexico student was reported missing on
November 10, police began tracking his credit card activity. Two men were
arrested after using the missing student's cards at a Walmart in Grants,
New Mexico. The two suspects eventually led police to the missing man's
body, which they had thrown into the cave after murdering him.
1. "Body Found in Cave South of Grants," www.abqjournal.com, 4
December 2012.
2. Kim Vallez, "Murdered man in cave may be UNM student: Pair of Cibola
County men charged with killing," www.krqe.com, 4 December 2012.
Comments: Double Sinks was popular with visitors to the El Calderon
area of El Malpais National Monument until it was closed to visitation due
to White-nose Syndrome concerns in December 2010.
A caver begins the 60-foot rappel into Whipple Cave, Nevada. The wide
pit entrance is divided by a natural bridge.

---------- Page 33 ----------
Previously Unreported Caving Incidents


********** 19 May 1985
Schoharie Caverns, New York
caver fall, injury and aid
A 20-year-old Canadian woman and six companions were explor-
ing Schoharie Caverns when she slipped and fell, breaking her leg. One
member of the party exited the cave to call for help while another, who
was an emergency medical technician, splinted her leg. Five volunteer
members of the Scho-Wright Ambulance Service responded and two of
them entered the cave. Although the woman was only 15 minutes from the
entrance, it took the two rescuers 4 hours to carry her out in a stretcher.
1. Joe Mahoney, "Rescuers carry woman from cave: Spelunking accident
leads to four-hour ordeal," Times Union, 21 May 1985.
2. "Cave Explorer 'Satisfactory' After Mishap," Gazette, 21 May 1985.
3. Chuck Porter, email communication, 9 April 2013.
4. Bob Addis, email communication, 9 April 2013.
Comments: Schoharie Caverns was purchased by NSS member Jim
Gage in 1958 for development as a show cave. After his death, the cave
and surrounding property were donated to the NSS and became the
Schoharie Caverns Nature Preserve.
Cueva del Viento, Puerto Rico
equipment problems, stranded, aid, no injury
In the summer of 1998, Samuel Oliveras and Félix Flecha Astacio
decided to explore Cueva del Viento in the municipality of Florida, Puerto
Rico. This would be their fourth visit to the cave, but their first time to
rappel the 80-foot drop leading to an underground river. Before entering
the cave, they ate breakfast and bought a box of batteries at a local bakery.
They entered the cave at 8:00 a.m. on a Monday morning. After
reaching the bottom of the pit, they discovered a small passage that was
too tight for their packs, so they left them behind. The packs contained
their spare batteries, food, and water.
After traveling about 60 feet, Oliveras's light (with the newly
purchased batteries) went out. A few minutes later, Astacio's light also
went out. Stranded in the dark, they were unable to make it back to their
packs. Oliveras later reported that the "60 feet was like one mile in the
darkness."
The cavers had left a call-out time of midnight. When they did not
return, their families waited a few more hours before calling authorities.
Although local authorities were notified, a search was not immediately
initiated. By Wednesday, friends of Oliveras and Astacio learned they
had not returned from their cave trip. Karel Hilversum and Norman Veve
arrived at the cave shortly after 3:00 p.m. on Wednesday. While Veve
waited at the entrance, Hilversum rappelled the pit and made voice
communication with the two cavers. They exited the cave at 7:00 p.m.
Wednesday and met a rescue squad, who were just arriving, along the
trail. Oliveras and Astacio had spent fifty-five hours in the dark.
1. Samuel A. Oliveras, atrapados
en la Cueva del Viento,"
Espeleorevista no. 7, July-December 2012, p. 40-41.
2. Samuel Oliveras, email communication, 9 April 2013.
3. Karel Hilversum, email communication, 10 April 2013.
Comments: Oliveras provides his own analysis of what they did wrong
and offers suggestions for future cave trips: "One could not anticipate
that freshly bought batteries would be defective. Never leave your pack
behind, even in tight spaces. Do not make your call-out time for rescue
too late." This is still good advice over a decade later.
Time spent away from caving packs should be minimized, especially
when all backup lights are in the packs. Many cavers wear two lights on
their helmets in order to reduce risk of losing light while away from their
packs, or when their packs are otherwise not easily accessible (while on
rope, for example). Some cavers wear an extra light attached to a lanyard
around their neck, in case they lose their helmet down a pit.


********** 10 November 2007
Candlelight Cave, Utah
difficulty on rope, no consequence
A group of cavers were descending a 240-foot-deep mine shaft in
order to access Candlelight Cave, located about 90 feet down the shaft.
The last caver to rappel was about halfway down when excess webbing
from his helmet's chinstrap jammed in his figure 8 rappel device. This
happened so fast that, when the chinstrap caught, it jerked his head
quickly enough that he momentarily lost consciousness.
He called down to his friends that he could not lock off or perform
a changeover, even though he had a Croll chest ascender and hand
ascender attached to his harness. He also could not get his chinstrap
undone, because it did not feature a quick-release mechanism. While
other members on the trip prepared to climb up to him, he called down
and asked for a knife.
A small pocket knife was attached to a carabiner using twine and
clipped to a prusik knot on the rope. The stuck caver then pulled the rope
up, retrieved the knife, and carefully cut his chinstrap. He was then able
to complete his descent.
1. Kent Forman, Incident Report, 1 November 2012.
Comments: The abilities to lock off one's rappel device and success-
fully perform a changeover are considered by many to be minimum
prerequisite skills for vertical caving. This caver called for a knife, even
though he was wearing two ascenders. Knives should be considered a last
resort in vertical situations, not the first tool to be reached for. Finally,
quick-release helmet chinstraps have become the standard for multiple
safety reasons.
Either the ability to change over or the possession of a quick-release
chinstrap would have prevented any need for help from other cavers.
Trip leaders would do well to ensure that cavers on their team have the
proper equipment and know how to use it.


********** 30 August 2009
Whipple Cave, Nevada
difficulty on rope, aid, no injury
Members of the Southern Nevada Grotto and Lund Volunteer Fire
Department spent a day and a half at Whipple Cave practicing cave rescue
techniques. As they climbed the 60-foot-deep entrance pit at the end of
day two, they passed a group of inexperienced persons ascending another
rope. The cavers and Lund volunteers were loading gear into their vehicles
when they heard a shout for help coming from the cave.
They returned to find that a 45-year-old male from Las Vegas had
ascended a short distance, but was unable to continue or change over to
rappel. The man was climbing a dynamic rope with a climbing harness,
two handled ascenders, and no chest harness. He soon became exhausted
using this inefficient system. Using a 3:1 haul system and belay, the group
had him up the pit within 10 minutes.
1. Gretchen Baker, Incident Report, 16 January 2011.

---------- Page 34 ----------
Comments: A 60-foot-deep pit is probably not the best place to learn
to ascend. A better practice is to teach novices on a rope that is rigged
in such a way that they can be lowered in case they encounter trouble.


********** 13 March 2010
Grutas de la Puente, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
falling object, injury, no aid
A group of teenagers were visiting the well-known Grutas de la
Puente in the state of San Luis Potosí. They had no helmets and insufficient
light. They entered the main entrance at about 8:00 a.m. and toured the
front part of the cave. They were leaving via a back entrance called Las
Escaleras (The Staircase) when a metal bar used as a step on the steep
climb fell and hit 15-year-old Francisco Nava Lomely on the head.
Six of the group continued out and hiked back to their camp, where
they called for help. The injured boy and four others turned around and
went back out the main entrance, where there was a Jeep waiting to take
them to camp. Espeleo Rescate México (Mexican Cave Rescue) and Red
Cross personnel arrived after midnight just as the injured boy arrived
back at camp. He was examined and treated for a contusion and mild
hypothermia. Another boy who had sprained his ankle on the hike back
to camp was also treated for pain.
1. Translated and abstracted by Mark Minton from a list of incidents
previously posted on an Espeleo Rescate México web site: http://espe-
leorescatemexico.org/. The site has since been taken down.
Comments: Wear a helmet. You never know what will fall and hit
you in the head.


********** 28 March 2010
Sótano del Popoca, Veracruz, Mexico
stranded, aid, no injury
A group of young tourists were on a commercially guided trip to
Sótano del Popoca in the state of Veracruz. They were lowered down a
200-foot-deep pit with a pulley system at about 3:00 p.m. When it was
time to leave, the distracted tourists failed to grab a pack being lowered
to them, which contained the equipment they would need for the ascent,
and it was lost in an underground river, leaving them stranded. One of the
guides called for help and Espeleo Rescate México responded along with
public safety officers, volunteer firefighters, and the Red Cross.
They waited nearly twelve hours until help arrived. The tourists were
cold and hungry but not injured, and it was determined that they could
climb out of the pit under their own power. Food and hot drinks were
taken down along with vertical gear. The tourists climbed out on their
own, with assistance at a rebelay and at the lip. Everyone was out safely
by 6:00 a.m. the following morning.
1. Translated and abstracted by Mark Minton from a list of incidents
previously posted on an Espeleo Rescate México web site: http://espe-
leorescatemexico.org/. The site has since been taken down.
Comments: It is preferable to have each caver keep track of their own
ascending system, and to wear that gear on the way down the pit. When
group gear is being utilized, it is very important to make sure someone is
keeping track of it. Sometimes, when gear belongs to everyone, it ends
up belonging to no one.


********** 14 July 2010
Burroughs Cave, New York
lost, aid, no injury
On the evening of 14 July 2010, a scout group was reported missing
when they did not return from exploring caves in Essex County, New York.
Two adult leaders, a man (47) and woman (49), led one 13-year-old and
two 14-year-old boys to Burroughs Cave. They negotiated a long, tight
passage to access the main part of the cave. After some exploring, they
could not find the passage leading out. The group said they could hear
rescuers searching for them later that night but could not make them-
selves heard. They were found the next evening, 24 hours after being
reported missing.
1. "Tragedy in the Adirondacks," www.adirondackbasecamp.com, 24
August 2010.
Comments: The referenced article concludes, "In caves use string or
other markers to help find your way back. Remove the material on your
way out." Despite the added conservation message about removing such
material, the use of string in caves is generally a poor idea. Even with the
best intentions, string is often left in the cave when it becomes difficult
to roll up after it has soaked up water, dirt, or mud. Do not justify leaving
string in a cave as being helpful for the next group.
A much better practice is to make sure everybody in the group, not
just the leaders, are paying attention to the route. Take the time to observe
landmarks and look behind you often to familiarize yourself with what
the cave will look like on the way out.
Previously Unreported Caving-related
Incidents


********** 23 October 2009
unnamed pit, Veracruz, Mexico
fell into pit, fatality
Three children were chasing a rabbit at night in the village of
Cimarrontla, Veracruz. While in pursuit, one of them fell into a pit. Espeleo
Rescate México (Mexican Cave Rescue), public safety officers, and the Red
Cross were called to the scene. The pit was especially dangerous because
of the mud and rocks that fell readily from the lip while rescue personnel
were inside. This was partially due to local people approaching the edge,
trying to watch the rescuers in action.
After the bystanders were kept back, the body of 12-year-old Eloy
Panzo was located at a depth of 400 feet. The body was placed in a Sked®
stretcher and hauled to the surface with a block and tackle system, assisted
by rescue personnel at various rebelays. The body was turned over to local
authorities before being returned to the family for burial.
1. Translated and abstracted by Mark Minton from a list of incidents
previously posted on an Espeleo Rescate México web site: http://espe-
leorescatemexico.org/. The site has since been taken down.

---------- Page 35 ----------
Three more images taken by Jansen Cardy during the 2012 NCRC
weeklong seminar mock rescue in Pettijohn Cave in Walker County,
GA. It shows an elaborate highline system in action. The mock 'patient'
wrapped in the brown tarp with red and green webbing restraints is
Instructor Qualification (IQ) class student (now NCRC instructor)
Thomas Evans from Bozeman, Montana.
INTERNATIONAL TECHNICAL
RESCUE SYMPOSIUM
albuquerque, new mexico
november 7-10, 2013
The International Technical Rescue Symposium (ITRS) gathers
a wide variety of professionals from law enforcement, fire service,
military, mountain, cave, swift water and industrial rescue, along with
equipment manufacturers and distributors, to discuss performance,
safety and improvements, and to share knowledge and test results
on a variety of related topics.
TOPICS INCLUDE
New Developments in Equipment
Presented jointly by
Medical Considerations in Rescue
T
Comparative Team Techniques
R
Analysis of High-Angle Accidents
PIGEON MOUNTAIN
Development in Helicopter Rescue
PMI
S
Industry Standards
Improved Techniques
CMC
RESCUE
Equipment Testing
Sponsored in part
by the National
For more information visit www.ITRSonline.org
Speleological Society

---------- Page 36 ----------
LETTERS
PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE
KILLER BEES AT GUAGUASI
Headquarters Update
In regard to your comments about "killer
bees" at Guaguas in the May 2013 issue of
As I write this in June our new roof is
the NSS News, they can indeed be quite
now in place. Several summer storms have
hazardous when active. Back in March 2000
proven the impermeable liner is indeed
on a Cullman Grotto trip to Mexico, this was
waterproof. See the photos for details of
one of the pits we did. Climbing up the high
how this was installed.
side (660+ feet) some bees started to circle
One of the first areas will be a remodel
around my face (about the only thing not
of the "serving kitchen" next to the audito-
covered up - I had a rag around my neck).
rium. Let's go back a few months OVP
By the time I got perhaps 40 feet from the
Dave Luckins worked with Stephanie Rubio,
top, there were two dozen bees orbiting my
our Facilities Manager, to host a caterer's
head inches away (much like flies). Patrick
open house. While touring our new head-
O'Diam, at the pit edge, told me to keep
quarters they asked them what they looked
quiet ("The bees are swarming" he said, in a
for when recommending an event venue.
subdued voice). Then one of the bees stung
Turns out we are set up to handle their basic
me in the back of my neck, above the rag. I
needs, and with only a few changes we'll
could hear a huge swarm near the rig point
be able to provide an optimum facility that
and I could see no reason why they couldn't
they can recommend to their clients-easily
come over and join their friends where I was.
a win-win for both the caterers and the NSS.
By then I was one notch below panic level.
As part of our upgrade Dave also took
I knew I mustn't bother them even if they
on the task of locating refurbished rolling
stung me and I hoped I could do a change
book stacks. Why rolling stacks? Not only
over in time (there was no way I was going
would we be able to store more in less
to continue on up to the top!). With the last
space, by closing the stacks up we would
ascender off I zoomed down to the bottom,
add another layer of fire protection to our
afraid the bees would follow. Normally, I am
archival library. Our new library stacks will
pretty careful when rappelling but that time I
hold over three times our current volumes,
couldn't go fast enough! They thought I was
allowing us room to grow for many decades.
out of control (about a 45 second rappel). I
New they would have cost over $190,000-
hid in a little grotto down at the other end
well beyond our range. After a year-long
of the pit and refused to come back up until
search he located exactly what we needed
the bees were gone. After the others had
for $35K, very close to his original estimate
started down the path a local came out of
and within our proposed budget.
the jungle and, without saying a word, went
HQ Chairman Dave Haun has been
over to a tree and whacked it with one of
breaking down the tasks for our new interior
those wicked curved machetes then started
build-out. That list should be posted by the
following me with that thing in his hand
time you read this. Watch our Facebook
(still keeping silent). Patrick later told me he
page for continual updates. If you're plan-
just wanted to earn a little money carrying
ning on being in the area contact Maureen
my stuff. Several years later I read about a
vicious bee attack at another Mexican pit
and thought, yes, that could have been me.
Gary Phelps
CLASSIFIED ADS
NSS #30170
Firefly Slaves for cave photography: FF 2 ($75)
Karst Tours
and FF 3 ($110) for digital. CD "On Three: An intro
to digital photography for cavers" ($15). New:
SW China
Cave Cards! individual ($3.50) or sets of six cards
($18) with stunning cave photos, envelopes. See
The Balkans
newly updated website: www.pjcaver.com. V/MC/
Laos and Vietnam
AMEX/Check. SITDCP, 80 Mountain St, Camden,
Science and culture for
ME 04843. 207-236-6112. pjcaver@gwi.net
scientists, hydrologists,
West Virginia Cave Books
cavers, and companions.
www.WVASS.org
Visit karst institute, local
TOP DOLLARS PAID FOR CARBIDE CAP
experts, and tourist sites
LAMPS, oil wick/lard lamps, UMWA local mining
ribbons, blasting cap tins, McDowell County
in spectacular landscapes.
miners scrip, scatter tags, carbide lamp parts and
Led by Dwight Deal, PhD
other small mining artifacts that we may need in
303-632-9254
our collection. We will pay more than anyone for
items needed. Contact Larry Click, 1021 North
Focused Tours
www.FocusedTours.com
Jefferson Street, Arlington, VA 22205-2454,
Handler (hqvolunteer@caves.org) for oppor-
tunities to help. We can use everyone, SO
please come by and lend a hand.
FUNDRAISING
We are 2/3rds of the way toward
our Team 404 goal. Help us top off this
thermometer and we'll quickly pay off the
mortgage. Any donation of $300 a year
or more automatically adds you to this
program. You've read it nearly every month
and the math backs it up-if every member
would sign up we'd pay this off in 7 months.
Together we're already making a big differ-
ence. If you're not a Team 404 member yet,
please take a moment, visit our home page
(caves.org) and download a donation form.
You'll receive a nice, monogrammed polo
shirt to wear to your next Grotto meeting
and recognition on a special plaque at our
new Headquarters.
Members have been purchasing a lot
of bricks and blocks in our new building.
You can inscribe 3 lines of 20 characters on
a "Buy-A-Brick," or reserve a block of the
current building as "your own." Every dona-
tion moves us one step closer to paying off
our mortgage.
We started our fundraising in force last
summer in West Virginia at Convention. We
want to top out the Team 404 thermometer
before the end of the year. Coming soon-a
mortgage gauge to show our progress
Thank you for continued support,
Wm Shrewebury
Wm Shrewsbury
President
703-241-3748 or e-mail LarryClick@msn.com
Website: http://www.clickstersminingartifacts.
com
SPELEOBOOKS.COM 295 7978. Cave and
bat gifts, books, clothing and jewelry. Prompt
personal service since 1973.
AD RATES: 50 cents per word, with a 10%
discount for prepaid ads running three months or longer.
The following count as one word each: P.O. box #: street
address; city; state & zip; phone number. E-mail or web
addresses exceeding 10 characters count as two words.
Payment must precede publication, but copy should be
e-mailed to the editor (davebunnell@comcast.net), to
reserve space. Copy should be received six weeks prior
to publication date (e.g., by May 15 for July issue). Make
checks payable to the National Speleological Society
and send to: Att: NSS NEWS ADVERTISING, 2813 Cave
Avenue, Huntsville, AL 35810-4431.

---------- Page 37 ----------
TEAM 404
68%
MEMBERS
this photo you can see the layers. First an insulating
yer of super dense Styrofoam-like material is laid in the
Iges of our metal roof. Next, another insulating layer of
Photos on this page were
er board is secured over the first and held in place with
taken by Liana Boop.
steners. Finally, a rubber membrane is bonded to the top
the hardboard in wide bands, and the membrane seams
e fused with a bonding agent and heat. This effectively
ves us a single, impervious layer.
The final rubber membrane as it rolled out can be seen in this
photo. This will be bonded to the layer below it before being fused
to each row. The added insulation and white rubber surface will also
decrease our electrical needs significantly!
Our new sliding bookshelf stacks. Once installed we will have over
3 times the shelf area we had before. When they are rolled together
they also add additional fire protection to our valuable archives.
GOAL
90%
80%
70%
60%
The first few stacks of material are spaced out on our roof
50%
- an insulation layer (white in background), the overlaying
fiber board (front right) and rolls of rubber membrane (upper
40%
left) can be seen.
30%
20%
10%
A close up of the fiber board overlay and how it is secured.
Once covered by the rubber membrane our roof is waterproof
for many decades.
In the campground we have three pavilions, one of which has an
industrial kitchen. Here you can see Ms. Rubio and the renters
viewing the facility.
They are moved by turning the crank on the end. This turns very
easily, even when loaded. Each unit is double sided with adjustable
book ends on each shelf. These were used in a high-end law office
for just a couple of years. As a result, they are in excellent condition.

---------- Page 38 ----------
UNDERGROUND UPDATE
VCA Newsletter
Georgia Speleological Society, visit www.
Vol. 22, No. 1,2 & 3
caves.org/survey/gss.
Vermont Cavers Association
Peter Quick writes about his push trips
Southwestern Cavers
to South Vent Cave in Dorset Mountain,
May-June 2013 Vol. 51, No. 3
Vermont. He first visited the cave in 1979
Southwestern Region of the NSS
and was deterred by a wedged stone that
Steve Peerman, the Project Director
made access to the rest of the cave impass-
for the Fort Stanton Cave Study Project,
able. He later returned in July of 2012 to
provides a very detailed report on the April
see if he could make the passage way bigger.
27-May 5, 2013 expedition. There were 66
Throughout the summer months, Peter, his
volunteers who gave nearly 5000 hours of
Hilti hammer drill, and a few others were
volunteer hours for the week-long expedi-
able to push and explore the cave to over
tion. This includes hours on the surface,
140 feet. Accompanying his article is the
hours underground, travel hours, and even
map of the cave and a scaled profile map
hours preparing for, writing reports, and
of the major caves of the Purgatory Plateau.
dealing with equipment. Some of the activi-
ties for the week long event include survey
Joel Flewelling notes that with the help
instrument calibration, a dig at Cactus Cave,
of VCA members, the Vermont Fish and
some reconnaissance in the Devils Canyon
Wildlife Department were able to conduct
area, ferromanganese sampling, water level
winter surveys in 13 hibernacula this winter
data logger deployment, radio location, bat
in Vermont. Vermont has been a confirmed
monitoring, paleoclimate work, and instal-
infected state since 2008. A few sites
lation of a cell phone booster in the field
showed a slight increase in bat numbers but
house. There were also survey trips into the
the overall statewide numbers continue to
Snowy River Passage and the MJ Passage.
decline. They did find banded bats in Aeolus
The overall length of the cave has increased
and Skinner Caves. The bat in Aeolus was
from 20.59 miles to 23.85. This bumped
banded last summer in New Hampshire and
Fort Stanton Cave up from the 31st longest
the bat in Skinner was banded last summer
cave in the US to the 21st longest all in one
in Rhode Island. Vermont is home to nine bat
week!
species; six species spend winters hibernat-
ing in caves and three migrate south.
TAG Caver
Summer 2013 Vol. 4, No. 2
Bulletin of the Georgia Speleological
Sewanee Mountain Grotto (Tennessee)
Survey
The SERA Karst Task Force (SKTF)
has been busy this past winter with two
Georgia Speleological Survey
cleanups. Cheryl Pratt includes an update
The 2012 Bulletin of the Georgia
on the second cleanup at Cumberland Gap
Speleological Survey includes several great
in Tennessee which took place in March.
articles. Matthew Niemiller, Dante B.
21 volunteers showed up to fill a dumpster
Fenolio, and Kirk Zigler include a detailed
with over two tons of garbage. Troy Fugua
article on the obligate cave fauna of Georgia
led the second cleanup effort at Devil's Den
and Larry O. Blair writes about prehistoric
Cave in Jackson County, Alabama where 13
throw-away tools found in Kingston Saltpeter
volunteers showed up on Earth Day weekend
Cave. There is also an article written by Joel
and removed over 1,100 pounds of scrap
Sneed on the discovery, exploration, and
metal that netted over $100 for the SKTF.
mapping of Byers Cave in Dade County,
Georgia. The original map for Byers Cave
Kelly Smallwood writes about the
was never published by Foxy Ferguson.
caver log book at the Liberty Restaurant in
Brent Aulenbach later digitized her map
Scottsboro, Alabama. One morning, while
and his version is included in the 2012
having breakfast with David Hughes and
bulletin with her permission. Byers cave is
Marion O. Smith at The Liberty, she inquired
currently being re surveyed by the Georgia
about the history of the log book. David origi-
Speleological Survey and is being led by
nally got the idea to place the log book after
Marty Abercrombie, who also includes a
seeing log books at The Court Restaurant in
report on his progress in the bulletin. Also
Lewisburg, West Virginia. In May of 1976
included in this issue is an update on Brent
he placed the first log book at The Liberty.
Aulenbach's survey of Frick's Cave. Because
While he was living in Arizona, the log book
of the cave being closed due to WNS, this
filled up SO Marion O. Smith kindly mailed it
was the first trip into the cave in over five
back to him. Marion has since replaced and
years. For more information or to join the
kept up with the log books. Included in her
Kelly Smallwood
article are some excerpts from the original
log book and some from the present day one.
If you are ever in TAG, a visit to The Liberty
is a must and make sure to ask your waitress
for the Caver Log Book.
IKC Update
June 2013 No. 109
Indiana Karst Conservancy
Keith Dunlap reports that the IKC has
surpassed the $102,600 fundraising goal to
cover the initial cost of the 50 acre Shawnee
Karst Preserve. All donations for land acqui-
sitions after June 30 will be credited to the
next project. Also included in this issue are
annual reports for IKC properties such as
Buddha Cave, Sullivan Cave, Wayne Cave,
Robinson Ladder, Shawnee Karst Preserve,
Upper Twin Cave, Suicide Cave, and
Orangeville Rise.
ON ROPE1
For the Serious Rope User
Bruce-Smith
owner of
On Rope 1
Caving since 1960
On Rope 1 manufactures the finest rope climbing
systems in the world. Cavers trust our name and
use our gear with confidence.
www.ONROPE1.com
sales@onrope1.com (423) 344-4716
5940-C Hwy 58, Harrison, TN 37341
ISO 9001:2008 CERTIFIED

---------- Page 39 ----------
UNDERGROUND ONLINE
In late April and early May, Mike
Florida area reported that two homes in
Schriber posted to CaveChat.org a thread
Seffner that were in danger of destruction
entitled, Releasable Rigging Using a Petzl
from sinkhole collapse were demolished.
Stop, asking for advice on rigging a redirect
These houses were condemned following the
using a pulley (forums.caves.org/viewtopic.
previously-reported death of Jeff Bush, who
php?f=5&t=15203). Among other respon-
was sleeping in bed when a sinkhole opened
dents, Scott McCrea offers a link to a neat
up under his bedroom and swallowed him.
Web page that calculates the forces involved
The sinkhole was said to remain unstable and
in redirects and depicts them pictorially. By
possibly still growing (tinyurl.com/lvgf07e).
dragging the pulley around, eight different
CavingNews .com reports that Seffner, a
forces on the anchor and pulley are displayed
suburb of Tampa, is within an area known
at lifeonaline.com/toys/deviation.php.
locally as "sinkhole alley," and accounts for
one-third (!) of all sinkhole-related insurance
Matt Bowers on May 1 brought to the
claims in Florida (tinyurl.com/nx55n44).
NSSwest Forum the news from Jewel Cave
management that background checks and
The BBC News and Archaeology, a
fingerprinting would be done on all caving
Web site of the Archaeological Institute
"trip leaders" to national parks and monu-
of America, carried an article on May 23
ments. This was met with some annoyance
mentioning that thousands of cave art paint-
by a few forum members. Two days later,
ings had been found in Burgos, Mexico.
Tom Evans, the NSS Government Liaison,
A presentation at the second meeting of
clarified things by noting that (1) all groups
Historic Archaeology in Mexico's Natural
must comply with the new regulations, not
History Museum reported that a total of
just cavers, and (2) Jewel Cave management
4,926 depictions were found in eleven
had instituted new rules that require the
caves, one of which contained 1,550
security measures only for trip leaders that
scenes. The images are of humans, insects,
access the cave off-hours (when monument
and other animals colored in red, yellow,
staff are not present) (groups.yahoo.com/
black, and white. Dating the paintings was
group/NSSwest/message/4166).
underway, but delayed by the absence of
associated artifacts. The depictions indicated
In the 1990s, the Gangsta Mappers
three groups of hunter-gatherers lived in the
tackled major cave mapping projects that
area. They "escaped the Spanish rule for
included New River Cave in Giles County,
200 years because they fled to the Sierra
Virginia, a six-mile-plus cave with travers-
de San Carlos where they had water, plants,
able passages located on eight levels within
and animals to feed themselves," according
a single fissure. Ken Walsh reported on the
to Martha Garcia Sanchez: bbc.co.uk/news/
Tritrog blog on May 1 that the Gangstas
world-latin-america-22632301.
thought they had finished mapping the cave
in 1997, but through a series of unfortunate
The month of May saw a flurry of
events, the final map was never produced.
articles about a land development threat to
Dave West eventually took up that chal-
Bracken Bat Cave in Bexar County, Texas.
lenge, but discovered a "good number" of
Famous as holding the largest bat colony in
unmapped leads. So, on April 27 28, Ava
the world, and also the largest concentration
Pope, Martin Groenewegen, Karen Willmes,
of mammals in the world, the cave is home to
Bob Hoke, Jessica Chesnakas, and Walsh
an estimated 20 million Mexican free-tailed
joined Dave West to survey those leads.
bats, which roost in the cave from March to
Among their discoveries were a formation-
October. The cave and 697 acres of natural
filled room with aragonite bushes and a small
habitats are owned by Bat Conservation
hole in the floor that "promised certain burial
International (BCI). The bats fly every year
to anyone willing to drop down it,' and added
from as far away as a thousand miles from
500+ feet to the survey (tritrogs.blogspot.
Mexico, and then give birth to their pups in
com/2013/05/gangsta-legacy.html).
the cave. As many as 500 baby bats have
been counted clinging to a single square
Anmar Mirza, National Coordinator
foot of the cave's walls. The threat comes
for the National Cave Rescue Commission
from Galo Properties, a land development
(NCRC), announced a May 22 Webinar intro-
company, which sought approvals to build
ducing the NCRC. The Webinar is 1:34:17
the 1545-acre Crescent Hills residential
long and is available for downloading from
development directly under the bat's flyway.
the NSS Web site (caves.org/webinars/).
About 200 people spoke against the devel-
opment at a May 29 San Antonio City
On May 22, WTSP of the Tampa Bay,
Council meeting. No one spoke for the devel-
Buford Pruitt
Mexican freetails emerging from Bracken
Bat Cave
opment. BCI presented a 13-day old petition
with 13,300 signatures against the project,
and was given the only standing ovation of
the evening. Andy Walker, Executive Director
of BCI, and Environmental attorney James
Cannizzo, who handles legal issues for the
Army's Camp Bullis, spoke to the possibility
of acquiring the Crescent Hills property and
placing it under protection. In addition to
concerns about the bats, citizens also brought
up the issue of water conservation. The prop-
erty is directly over the Edwards Aquifer, and
the development will force the San Antonio
Water System to extend water and sewer
hookups five miles from their current service
area. None of the city council members had
ever visited the cave (batcon.org/).
With all the sensitive caves and extreme
sports in the World today, caves must now
contend with a (new) threat at the hands, or
wheels, of two happy-go-lucky Welshmen.
Reported in CavingNews.com on May 28,
they ride unicycles in the larger passages of
caves, and fast. One of the two off-handedly
remarked that, "people like it for the pretty
things underground there's a lot of weird
things underground, but for me it's just an
underground playground." The video shows
the fellows cycling through a stream here,
under soda straws there, unnecessarily
dragging hands across ceiling and walls, and
speaking repeatedly about the challenges of
their sport's physical obstacles and danger.
One of them stated that if there is an injury
such as a broken leg, there's no way out,
although later in the video the other guy
mentions not wanting to bother volunteer
rescue groups. Right. I wonder if they can see
and avoid running over small cave animals
that might be in their paths (cavingnews.
com/20130528-unicycle-caving-a-unique
combination).

---------- Page 40 ----------
CAVE CHRONICLES
What is the most ridiculous
a "Carl's Bad Cavern" (at least the guy who
cave name?
named it had a sense of humor.)
Claude Koch: Skinmites Cave, Washington,
Bob Gulden: Rubber Chicken Cave,
which is a renaming of Stalagmite Cave.
Greenbrier Co. WVa. Named for the rubber
squeeze toy found when digging open the
Janice Curtis: Skagnasty Cave!
entrance.
Clinton Elmore: There's lots of crazy cave
Jonny Slumpff: Fixin' to Die in Colorado.
names in Tennessee. Here's some random
Really makes me want to visit
ones: Hero Bucket Horror Hole, A Void
Pit, The Soul Scraper, Didn T Go Well,
Hal Love: A few silly names from a quick
Sounded Well, Hoe Ho Hole, Gills Ghyll,
look at the Tennessee Cave Survey list are
Carlsgood Caverns, A Hole, Slut Slot, Gore
Pickled Indian Cave, Beavis & Butthead
2-Crotch Pit..
Cave, Cold As A Witches Pit, and Gollums
Crack. I'm sure there are many more.
Bruce Kirchner: One of the entrances to
Maxwellton in WV was aptly named Cow
Philip Rykwalder: Virgil the Turtle's
Shit Pit.
Greathouse Cave, Montana. After a character
in a Vonnegut book.
Don Hunter: How about Afterbirth Cave, in
Dade County, GA.
Mike Crockett: Timmy's X Pit Cave where
X is a variable. It began as Timmy's Pit Cave
Steve Millett: Perineal Descent
then Timmy's 2 Pit and 3 Pit Cave then more
pits were discovered then the X was adopted.
Andy Witt Twilight of the Chicken Head
X increased to 17 but has now gone down
Cave on Pigeon Mtn, Georgia.
due to an invading quarry. We think the
entrance to Timmy's X Pit Cave has been
Valerie Haskins: we named one cave the
rediscovered but the entry drop is blocked by
"Chip Won't Fit Pit" since the landowner's
chockstones. An effort to get by them and
son kept getting stuck in it.
verify is forthcoming. So we thought it was
Timmy's XX Pit Cave (the 2nd X meaning
Jeff Cody: Buckets of Blood Cave in
former) but now it may be Timmy's XXX Pit
Tennessee
Cave (the 3rd X meaning former former).
James Jasek: See My Shovel Cave
Bradley Jones: Alabama has 12 caves with
the word chickenhead in them such as
Marian McConnell: When we began
Dances with Chickenhead, Rootin Tootin
exploring our property we found and named
Chickenhead, Teach Your Chickenhead
SO many caves and sinkholes that we finally
Well, Mad As A Wet Chickenhead, Blow
named one, "For Pete's Sake (How Many
It Out Your Chickenhead, and Soda Top
More Are There?)" Check out the map on
Chickenhead Drop.
page 103 of the new book, "Murder Hole."
Crash Kennedy: In my Mexican project area,
Jim Pisarowicz: Larry Fish and I explored
we have a Betty Crocker Cave, ¿Donde esta
and mapped a cave in Colorado we called
el Baño? Cave, Tarzan Cave, Jane Cave,
"Chickens on My Mind".
I-don't-know-if-it-is-Big Cave, Styrofoam
Cave, and many more.
Jeremy Browning: "Left Tit Pit" and "The
Cave Formerly Known As Bob"
Nick Addington: In Rockcastle Co Kentucky
there is a cave named Baby Head Voodoo,
Alan Staiman: "Burnsville Sarlacc Mighty
for a disembodied baby doll head found there
Death Pit.. because all caves in Bath County
have to have B names. This one was named
Pam Duncan: Mad as a Wet Hen well, the
by Loyahanna Grotto in the 90's"
story is priceless. Ask MOS
Conrad Bateman: Smeagol (a cave in
Al Goodcave: Small Dull Cave in Monroe
the Dales) and another one there called
County Indiana. It is nether small nor dull.
Crackpot, its a nice little cave
Joel M. Sneed: My entry in this category is
Chad McCain: In Perry County, MO we have
Six Chicken Heads over Georgia.
Philip Rykwalder
Dave Crusoe: The most ridiculous name I can
think of would have to go to Lego Puzzlepiece
Rocktopus Cave, a Berkshire-area cave-dig
in Massachusetts. The cave formed in
wonderfully friable marble that breaks apart
in pieces that could (theoretically) be put back
together. But man, that would be a puzzle.
It also snags just about anything a caver is
wearing. The name emerged naturally from
the friendly dig-side banter of the day!
Adam Mcdowell: "Hell if I know" on the
MO/AR line
Johanna Kovarik: Stately Beaver Pleasure
Palace Cave
Neil Marchington: Coochie Cave, OR. Fecal
Cobble Cave, MT. Cactus Crawl, NV.
Lee Florea: O-by-goth Biscuits and Gravy
Cave
Stuart Marlatt: Buttress-Buttress-Gully Cave,
or Cave of the Cosmic Banana is also pretty
groovy (Colorado)
Scott Linn: We were digging in the Marble
Mountains, and the digger got excited and
started throwing large rocks out of the dig,
hitting me, yelling "I can hear the spring
stream!". I named it Bruise Spring Stream.
Christina Richards "Bang Bang Blow Hole"
since it took a lot of bang to open up this
incredible pit.
Evan Gehring: 20 pound Tick Cave, Fix'n
to Cry, Torch Ungal, P-Bar, Bad Medicine,
Dog Trap, Bobcat Blowhole, Virgel, Little
Cabbage Cave aka Lechuguilla, Tongue River
Cave, Holy Sheep Cave
Dave Bunnell: We assigned many interesting
names to sea caves based on real or perceived
dangers: Impalement Cave, Crack of Doom
Cave, Slam Dunk Cave, If you Dare Cave,
Suicide Crevice, Deathtrap, Thrashed
Dinghy. Others were based on shape, my
favorite: Two Bedrooms and a Bath Cave.
Our next Cave Chronicles Topic:
If you could share a tip of anything
you've learned while caving it
would be
Send your submissions to Philip by
September 1 for publication in our
November issue: philip@cavenow.com

---------- Page 41 ----------
READING
Steinmann and Hedin, 2010) refers to two
STEINMANN FOR BOOK REVIEW MISTAKES
new Colorado harvestmen species that
The review of my book Cave Creatures
evolved and diverged from their surface
of Glenwood Caverns in the Reading
ancestors approximately 10 million years
section of the May 2013 NSS News, by
ago.
G.O Graening, contains a litany of unjustified
Most of the new cave invertebrate
attacks on my personal credibility that are
species I have discovered are not yet
corrected below. An e-mailed apology was
described, including at least 10 new Dipluran
sent to me from Dave Bunnell, the Editor
species. Dr. Lynn Ferguson presented
of the NSS News, regarding the personal
the poster "A Preliminary Report on the
attacks in the review. I have been an NSS
Cave Diplura of Colorado" at the 2009
member for 28 years, contributed thousands
International Congress of Speleology, show-
of volunteer hours to learn more about cave
ing that the 7 new species of Haplocampa
life in Colorado., and received grant money
dipluran I discovered in Colorado represent
for my studies from the NSS. For me to be
27% of all the known Haplocampa species
disrespected in a demeaning book review in
from caves in the world (Ferguson, 2009).
the NSS News is wrong, and a rebuttal to
I have collected approximately 45 new
the book review follows:
springtail species as determined by Dr. Ken
1. The reviewer writes "The author's
Christiansen, Dr. Jacek Pomorski and others.
boast of finding '100 new species' is unsup-
I collected about 10 new millipede species
ported in the biological literature," suggesting
with two new genera as determined by Dr
that I am not being truthful about my new
William Shear. My findings also include
species discoveries, while in fact have found
several new centipede species with one in
over 100 new invertebrate species in the
a family previously not known from North
caves of Colorado. I am a cave biologist
America, as indicated by Dr. William Shear.
and a Research Associate with the Denver
My collections include at least 2 new
Museum of Nature & Science who has
species of dung beetle as identified by Dr.
worked hard studying cave invertebrates in
Frank Krell and 2 new species of Leodidae
Colorado for the past 15 years. I was in no
beetle as identified by Dr. Stewart Peck and
way "boasting" about my finds, I was simply
Dr. Steve Ashe. I also collected 2-3 new
quantifying my results.
species of Harvestmen as determined by
Ten of the new species I found are
Dr. Shahan Derkarabetian, plus one new
named and published, representing a small
spider species in the genus Hypochilus.
fraction of the total number of new species
A minimum of 2 new worm species were
I collected to date. New species I found
discovered by me in Sulphur Cave, as deter-
that are published and named consist of
mined by Steve Fend with the USGS, along
2 new pseudoscorpion species and 8 new
with one new species of ostracod. The 20
Collembola species. The pseudoscorpions
new species of mites I have found are a
were described in the paper "Two new
conservative estimate. Additionally, I found a
cavernicolous species of the pseudoscorpion
new species of pseudoscorpion in the family
genus Cryptocreagris (Pseudoscorpiones:
Larcidae which Dr. Mark Harvey has not yet
Neobisiidae) from Colorado" (Harvey and
formally described. I've also discovered 2
Muchmore, 2009). The 8 new species of
new fern species, one Cystopteris and one
Collembola were described in three sepa-
Woodsia, growing on limestone near caves
rate papers: a) Four new genera of North
as determined by Dr. Michael Windham at
American Hymenaphorurini (Collembola:
Duke University, and I am involved with two
Onychiuridae) with a description of new
new moonwort (Botrychium) species being
species and a key to the world genera of the
worked on by Dr. Donald Farrar at Iowa
Tribe (Pomorski and Steinmann, 2004),
State University.
revision of the genus Typhlogastrura in North
2. I am offended by the reviewer writing
American caves with description of five new
that "a secondary goal of this book is evident:
species (Christiansen and Wang, 2006),
to focus on the personal achievements of
and c) Review of North American species
the author," and "The vast majority of the
of the genus Onychiurus (Collembola:
words in this booklet are used to describe
Onychiuridae), with a description of four new
the author, his accomplishments, and other
species from caves (Pomorski, Furgol and
aspects of his life." After reading these
Christiansen, 2009). A paper co-authored,
statements I wondered "How could some-
"Repeated and time-correlated morphologi-
one be SO absolutely wrong, and why were
convergence in cave-dwelling harvestmen
these incorrect statements published in the
(Opiliones, Laniatores) from montane
western North America (Derkarabetian,
five times in the entire book if one does not
include the "About the Author" page at the
end of the book. How can my name being
mentioned five times out of over 2,000
words get mutated into "The vast majority of
the words in this booklet are used to describe
the author
I am not an egomaniac as
the reviewer implies. In reality, I go about
my cave life studies relatively quietly.
3. It is ridiculous for the reviewer
to suggest that I "should consult a spele-
obiologist for assistance" when I am a
speleobiologist. The reviewer's statements
"With such help, some of the animals
could at least be identified to the familial
taxonomic level," and "more descriptive
names than "fly" can be employed," ignores
the fact that 14 of the 18 species shown in
my book are specifically identified to family,
genus or species. My use of the word "fly"
is intentional because the book is written for
tourists and non-scientists. I am more famil-
iar with the cave invertebrates in Colorado
and the Southern Rocky Mountains than
anyone else I am aware of.
4. All of the species I collected were
properly identified and verified by taxono-
mists from around the world, contrary to
the reviewer's statement "even an avid cave
animal collector cannot know he has a new
species without consulting a taxonomist."
5. The reviewer mistakenly writes
"There is no mention of any of the taxono-
mists who are doing the majority of the
hard work that results in the publication of
his new species." I mention several taxono-
mists including Dr. Mark Harvey, Dr. Jacek
Pomorski and Dr. Helen Pigage.
6. I take great offense to the reviewer
belittling my work by saying "It is fun and
relatively easy to collect a new species of
cave invertebrate." Maybe finding a new
species is easy where the reviewer comes
from, yet in Colorado legally collecting a new
cave-adapted species is often quite difficult.
First, I need to obtain a Special Use Permit
from the US Forest Service as most Colorado
caves are on public lands. Just getting to
many Colorado caves requires driving across
the state, then 4-wheel driving on steep
mountain roads, followed by long uphill hikes
in difficult terrain at altitudes over 10,000'
above sea level. Accessing the cold, wet
caves can require rapelling and ascending.
One very dangerous cave I have been
studying has lethal levels of hydrogen sulfide
and carbon dioxide, requiring special safety
measures to enter the cave, and has sulfuric
acid drips with a pH of zero coming off the
ceiling. Once inside a cave, I must look
carefully for hours to find and collect tiny
cave invertebrates, sorting and labeling the

---------- Page 42 ----------
specimens into vials, locating taxonomic
rect in the book. I use the term accurately
experts to identify the specimens, and often
to describe the cave creatures in my book
needing to return to a cave multiple times to
that lack pigment. The definition of albino
collect find specimens of a rare new species.
from Merriam-Webster dictionary is "an
Publications and papers regarding the new
organism exhibiting deficient pigmentation."
species also need to be written to document
Numerous other cave biologists also use the
my results. If finding new species in caves
word albino to describe cave animals without
is SO easy, why am I the only person in
pigmentation.
Colorado actively doing so?
10. The reviewer improperly writes that
7. The reviewer writes "The author
"A pseudoscorpion is not a top predator,
appears to be well-rewarded for his discov-
but just a first-level predator" in reference
eries by a taxonomist who named several
to my assertion that the pseudoscorpion
species after Mr. Steinman(and even his
Cryptocreagris steinmanni is at the top of
son)." In actuality it was three different
the food chain in Glenwood Caverns. There
taxonomists who named three separate
new species in my honor, with a fourth new
REFERENCES:
species being named after our young son. I
Christiansen and Wang. 2006. A Revision of
have no role whatsoever in the naming of
the Genus Typhlogastrura in North American
the new species I find, and I was pleasantly
Caves With Description of Five New Species.
surprised to hear that new species were being
Journal of Cave and Karst Studies. V. 68, no.
named after me..
2, p 85-98.
8. For the reviewer to write that the
Derkarabetian, Steinmann and Hedin. 2010.
"reader is constantly reminded of this honor
Repeated and Time-Correlated Morphological
by such redundant statements as "Springtail,
Convergence in Cave-Dwelling Harvestmen
a tiny new species named Onychiurus stein-
(Opiliones, Laniatores) from Montane Western
manni that was discovered by the author,"
North America. PloS One 5):e10388.
and .named Cyrptocreagris steinmanni
Doi: :10.1371/journal.pone.0010388.
after the author" is inaccurate, given that
these two quoted phrases are the only times
Ferguson. 2009. Preliminary Report on the Cave
such statements are made.
Diplura of Colorado (Hexapoda: Diplura:
Campodeidae). Longwood University,
9. It is wrong for the reviewer to write
Farmville, VA.
that my use of the term "albino" is incor-
SOCIETY NEWS
IMPORTANT NOTICE FOR FEDERAL
to the organizations of their choice during
EMPLOYEES
the annual charity drive, which runs from
NSS JOINS COMBINED FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
September 1 through December 15.
Federal & Military employees: You may
What an easy way to direct your chari-
now select the NSS to receive your donations
table giving to support caves, cavers, and
as part of the Combined Federal Campaign!
your favorite society! For information on
When the new Campaign drive begins this
the CFC, visit www.cfctoday.org
fall, please designate the NSS, # 10808,
to receive your contributions. Thank you!
NEW NSS DIRECTORS ELECTED IN JUNE
For information on the CFC, visit www.
Thank you for voting in the 2013 NSS
cfctoday.org
Board of Directors election! 1,900 ballots
NSS JOINS COMBINED FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
Make sure you're ready for
DONATIONS MADE EASY!
We're proud to announce that the NSS
summer un with logo gear
has been accepted as a recipient on the
from the NSS Bookstore!
2013/2014 Combined Federal Campaign
(CFC) National List. This means that now
federal (including Military) employees all over
the world may select the NSS, # 10808, as
the recipient of their donations.
Established in 1961, the CFC is the
largest workplace charity campaign in the
country and the only campaign authorized to
solicit and collect contributions from federal
employees in the workplace. Through this
effort, nearly four million federal employees
and military personnel are able to contribute
nssbookstore.or (250)852-1300
are no other animals living in the dark zone
of Glenwood Caverns capable of being a
predator of this pseudoscorpion. After more
than a dozen collecting trips into the cave I
am certain this pseudoscorpion is the top
predator in the cave.
Cave Creatures of Glenwood Caverns
is 32 pages with large color photos of
seldom-seen animals from one of the most
popular caves in Colorado. It is $9.95 at
Amazon.com and the NSS Bookstore. This
book is great for both kids and adults who
are interested in caves, insects, and ecology.
David B. Steinmann, NSS#27417
Harvey and Muchmore. 2009. Two new caver
nicolous species of the pseudoscorpion genus
Crytptocreagris from Colorado. Subterranean
Biology 7:55-64.
Pomorski, Furgol and Christiansen, 2009). Review
of North American Species of the Genus
Onychiurus (Collembola: Onychiuridae), With
a Description of Four New Species from Caves
Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. (102)6: 1037-1049
Pomorski and Steinmann. 2004. Four new
genera of North American Hymenaphorurini
(Collembola: Onychiuridae) with a description
of new species and a key to the world genera
of the Tribe). Insect Systematics and Evolution.
35:1:16-27.
were submitted, electing Bill Putnam, Dean
Wiseman, Mike Hood, Bill Jackson, and
Nathan Farrar. Nathan will serve a 1-year
term (filling a director vacancy), while others
will serve 3-year terms. Those elected will
join current directors Bill Liebman, Peri
Frantz, Randy Paylor, Mike Crockett,
Dick Mitchell, Margot Geisler, and Carol
Tiderman on the 2014 NSS Board of
Directors. More specifics of the election
results can be viewed on the NSS web site.

---------- Page 43 ----------
Support for the NSS News provided by Petzl
WELCOME TO THE
TEST LAB
DOWNLOAD THE FREE
CMC RESCUE FIELD GUIDE APP.
LEARN MORE
www.cmcrescue.com/app
PETZO
®
Where our products are inspired, and concepts are proven by a dedicated
team of highly experienced engineers and rescue professionals. From the
lab to the field, and everywhere in between, CMC Rescue is the most
trusted name in rescue training and equipment.
TESTED. PROVEN. TRUSTED.
CMC
RESCUE
SINCE 1978
CMCRESCUE.COM

---------- Page 44 ----------
What happens
when it happens to you?
As an experienced caver, you know the
limits of your skills and abilities.
That confidence is what makes you
a good explorer.
The very nature of caving requires it.
You feel safe in the belief that accidents
only happen to someone else.
But what happens when that someone
is on the trip you're leading?
Worse yet...
what happens if it's you?
Accidents are unpredictable.
They can impact your trip
at any time,
in any cave,
to any caver.
Do you know what to do?
Be part of the solution.
RESCUE
AUGUST 2013
www.caves.org/commission/ncrc/national
Photo by Jansen Cardy, NSS #50665
