
---------- Page 1 ----------
SPELEOLOGICAL
SM STATE
american Caving accidents
50TH ANNIVERSARY
EDITION
1967 - 2017

---------- Page 3 ----------
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS
Improving Safety Through 50 Years
of Accident Reports and Analysis
Editor
Bonny Armstrong NSS 43003
SPELEOLOGICAL
SIN
Printed by Ovid Bell Press, Inc., Fulton, Missouri
HOMELAND

---------- Page 4 ----------
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS
Improving Safety Through 50 Years of Accident
Reports and Analysis
Published by the National Speleological Society
6001 Pulaski Pike
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-1122
USA
(256) 852-1300
nss@caves.org
www.caves.org
© Copyright 2017 National Speleological Society
ISBN 978-1-68044-008-9
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means without the expressed written permission of the National Speleologi-
cal Society, Inc., except that portions relevant to a course of instruction spon-
sored by an internal organization of the National Speleological Society, Inc.
may be reproduced for educational purposes provided that credit is given to
the author(s) and to the National Speleological Society, Inc.; and provided
further that this notice of copyright and the disclaimer of liability set out
herein are reproduced and distributed with each copy.
DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
Serious injury or death could result from use of the techniques, practices,
or equipment described in this book. It is your responsibility to obtain for
yourself qualified instruction in safe caving and cave rescue, understanding
that even the best training only reduces, and does not eliminate, the risks of
death or injury.
You assume the risk of injury or death by using the techniques, practices, or
equipment described in this book.
About the cover:
Members of the Knoxville Volunteer
Rescue Squad (left to right, Mike Greene,
Mark Walker, Trevor Pickel) hone their
cave rescue skills at the bottom of Aus-
mus Well in Tennessee. Photo by Chris
Higgins. To see more of Higgins' work,
visit www.chrishigginsphoto.com.
Photo next page:
Cave rescue practice in Maligne Cave,
Alberta, Canada. Photo by Greg Horne.
Cover designs by Charlie Vetters.

---------- Page 5 ----------
Editor's Note
FEATURE ARTICLES
Preparing to Win: Fifty Plus Years of Cave Rescue in America, Don Paquette
Dragon Cave: America's First Cave Rescue?, Dean H. Snyder
Perspectives on Cave Rescue Preplanning, John Punches & Bonny Armstrong
Rappel Test: A Test You Can't Fail, Scott McCrea & Andy Armstrong
Suspension Trauma Underground, Roger Mortimer
Small Party Assisted Rescue: An Emerging Cave Rescue Philosophy, Andy Armstrong
Using Contingency Rigging to be a Safer Caver, Gretchen Baker
Cave Rescue North of the 49th: The Canadian Experience and Results, Christian Stenner
PTSD and Cave Rescue: Who Rescues the Rescuers?, Tom Wood
An Introductory Guide to Carabiners: A Critical Component of Your Vertical System
for Ensuring Safety on Rope, Thomas Evans
Injury Prevention in Cave Diving, Peter Buzzacott
Floyd Collins: His Accident Started it All, Roger W. Brucker


********** Cave Better, Cave Safer: Join the NSS, Curt Harler
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS 2015-2016
Description of Incident Results and Types
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics 1967-2017
2015-2016 List of Reported Accidents and Incidents
2015 & 2016 Incident Maps
2015 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
2015 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
2015 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
2016 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
2016 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
2016 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
Steve Hudson Service Award to Cave Rescue
Contributors
Contents

---------- Page 6 ----------
A Tribute to American Caving Accidents
During four-and-a-half decades of caving, I have found it enjoyable, educational, and meaningful to study
each edition of American Caving Accidents (ACA). Upon reflection, it seems that ACA never ceases to provide
laughter, learning, tributes, and remembrances.
Laughter because of those little incidents that have a happy ending, and that are embarrassingly familiar
to most cavers that have gone underground for more than a time or two. An accidental slide down a muddy
slope into a chilly pool of water. Then hopping back up, straightening your eyeglasses, and enduring the
playful teasing of your teammates. A cup-over-teakettle tumble, planting you on your head, but surprisingly
finding things none the worse for the wear. Starting a perfect rappel, and then having your partner point out
that she is still holding your helmet in her hand. Frogging back out to near the top of a surface pit, and then
realizing that you have left the cars keys conscientiously hidden under a rock near the bottom of the deepest
drop. Lots of caving. Lots of experiences. Lots of smiles.
Learning by reading about the misfortune of others, and then applying those lessons to your future cave
explorations. Being reminded that some incidents are catalyzed by a singular catastrophic calamity, while
others seem to snowball from a series of little hiccups into something that is eventually out of control. As
such, ACA serves as a tutor and as a mentor. Proving by written example the old adage, "Except by the grace
of the good Lord, there go I." Raw experience certainly is a ruthless teacher. But, fortunately, ACA is a more
benevolent one.
Tributes to cavers who survived scary events, and to the rescue personnel that saved them. Consider,
for instance, an underground entrapment caused by unexpected flash flooding. It takes a lot of strength of
character to hustle above the high-water mark, try to stay warm, marshal your resources, keep your spirits
up, and hang in there for however long it takes for the water to go back down. It's a tough situation, testing
the courage of the caver. Meanwhile, the rescuers (often including your cave-club friends) work relentlessly,
fret, worry, rely on their training, fight through exhaustion, and hope for the best. ACA is replete with inspir-
ing stories of cavers, and of rescue teams, who have endured much to bring everyone back home safe and
sound.
Remembrances of people, of cavers, of friends, and of times that changed everything forever. Honoring
those that are gone. Encouraging those that are left behind. Powerful stories, these. Moving words shared
with the world through the mechanism of ACA. On a splendid day, two exceptional young men and their
team journeyed to one of the greatest pits in the South. An open-air wonder, a speleo-classic, a frequently
visited spectacular, a drop for the ages. Two young men, full of hope and of promise. Excellent students from
one of the top technological universities in America. Positioned at the bottom of a 23-story-deep pit, and en-
sconced in the recommended safe place-under a sheltering overhang, and thus well protected from small
stones accidentally kicked in by explorers from above. They did everything right; everything perfectly. Sud-
denly, without warning and totally unprovoked, tons of the pit wall immediately above the boys exploded
from the geologic attachment point. And, in a twinkling of an eye, they were gone. The reasons for some
things in life are unknown and unknowable. Perhaps God needed a pair of heroes like these two young men
back in heaven-right now - for another important assignment. And he knew that the rest of us would be
tough enough to handle the heartbreak.
Laughter, and learning, and tributes, and remembrances. All in a single written volume. Quite a publica-
tion indeed.
Dave Hughes, NSS 14550
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 7 ----------
EDITOR'S
NOTE
F
ifty years ago, NSS member Rane Curl was
reading his latest issue of Accidents in North
American Mountaineering when he had an ex-
cellent idea. Why not create a publication that re-
cords, reports, and analyzes caving accidents, similar
to what the American Alpine Club had been doing
since 1948? And so, in 1967, the National Speleologi-
cal Society began collecting and reporting caving ac-
cidents in what was soon to become one of the NSS's
most popular publications, American Caving Accidents
(ACA).
ACA is more than just the journal of record for
caving accidents in North America. It is a valuable
educational tool for novice and experienced cavers
alike. By reading accident and incident reports, cav-
ers are reminded of, and often introduced to, the
many things that can go wrong underground. Ana-
lytical comments are provided with most of the re-
ports, and a wise caver will take the time to think
about each report carefully. Is the incident something
that could happen to you or to your teammate? Do
you regularly carry the necessary equipment to deal
with the emergencies reported in these pages? Do
you know how to help a fellow caver who is stuck
on rope, halfway up a 200-foot pitch or who has a
fractured ankle?
This special 50th anniversary issue of ACA in-
cludes several feature articles, written by experts in
their fields along with two years of accident reports.
Whether you have been caving since before the first
edition of ACA or you just joined the NSS, I am con-
fident you will find something new, educational, and
interesting in this issue.
At times, it may seem as if this book is one long
promotion for the National Cave Rescue Commis-
sion (NCRC)-several of the contributors are NCRC
instructors, many of the photographs are from NCRC
training events, and you'll find the NCRC mentioned
dozens of times in these pages. This is not intention-
al, but it cannot be helped; the NCRC is the world's
leading cave rescue training organization. Every
year, hundreds of cavers, rescue agency personnel,
and land managers take part in NCRC trainings.
An obvious benefit of this growing interest in
cave rescue is the increasing number of successful,
small party rescues reported to ACA. My favorite
recent example is the incident at Neffs Cave, Utah,
in February, 2016. A caver dislocated his shoulder
after completing several rappels in one of the coun-
try's deepest caves. Unable to climb out on his own,
he was assisted by his teammates, who built coun-
terweight systems and traveling hauls to get him up
four pitches. This was accomplished with gear from
one caver's pack. That caver knew how to build and
operate different types of rescue systems because he
had recently taken the NCRC's Small Party Assisted
Rescue class. In fact, he had taken the class twice. Be-
cause of thoughtful rescue preparedness on the part
of one caver, the patient was out of the cave and on
his way to a hospital in less time than it would take
for the county search and rescue team to even reach
the cave entrance.
A few months later, I saw on social media that
seven cavers, exploring deep within the Binkley Cave
System in Indiana, were overdue, and portions of the
cave were flooding. This was especially troubling
news because some of those cavers are my friends.
Yet I was extremely optimistic. The overdue cavers
were all experienced. They had participated in res-
cue trainings and mock rescue scenarios. The local
cavers who responded were some of the country's
most experienced rescuers. All of that training paid
off. The cavers underground took the appropriate ac-
tions to stay safe and warm while they waited for the
floodwaters to recede, and cavers and land managers
on the surface organized a response that adequately
planned for a full-scale rescue without overtaxing re-
sources unnecessarily.
Looking back on 50 years of ACA, a familiar
message resonates through every issue-under-
standing what can go wrong underground can help
cavers avoid getting in similar situations. But caving
accidents will happen, no matter how careful or pre-
pared we are. I hope in this book that an additional
message comes through-when cavers are trained in
technical rescue and wilderness medicine, the out-
come of a caving accident can be vastly improved.
Bonny Armstrong, NSS 43003
Heber City, Utah
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 8 ----------
Acknowledgements
I sincerely thank everyone who has contributed in some way to this book. This includes:
Sarah Richards, George Dasher, Curt Harler, Steven Frye, Charlie Vetters, Andy Armstrong, Yvonne Droms,
and Richard Breisch.
Also, John Adsit, Gretchen Baker, Karen Balch, Roger Brucker, Dave Bunnell, Peter Buzzacott, Scott Christen-
son, Jim Coke, Kimberly Dalby, Brian Dickey, Thomas Evans, Bryce Ferguson, Chris Higgins, Dave Hughes,
Ray Keeler, Johanna Kovarik, Amber Lehmann, Bryce Ling, John Maddox, Tom Madsen, Amy McCrea, Scott
McCrea, Cami McKinney, Mark Minton, Roger Mortimer, Stephen Mosberg, Rene Ohms, Don Paquette, Mel
Eady-Pumplin, John Punches, Bill Putnam, Wm Shrewsbury, Dean Snyder, Christian Stenner, Sarah Truebe,
Forrest Wilson, Tom Wood, and everyone who submitted reports and photos.
American Caving Accidents
Review Committee
2015-2016
Bonny Armstrong
editor
Andy Armstrong
Richard Breisch
George Dasher
Yvonne Droms
Mark Minton
Stephen Mosberg
Rene Ohms
Sarah Richards
Forrest Wilson
and
Brian Dickey
webmaster
American Caving Accidents
B.A.
American Caving Accidents editors
and the years they reported
Rane Curl 1967-1970
Jennifer Anderson 1971
Richard L. Breisch 1972-1975
Steve Knutson 1976-1993
William O. Putnam 1994-2005
Ray Keeler 2006-2010
Bonny Armstrong 2011-present
All issues of ACA are available to NSS members at
www.caves.org

---------- Page 9 ----------
Fifty Plus Years of Cave Rescue in America
N
ational Collegiate Athletic Association
(NCAA) basketball coach Bob Knight fre-
quently said, "The key is not the will to
win everybody has that. It is the will to prepare to
win that is important." Since its inception the Nation-
al Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) has been do-
ing just that. It is one of the more respected Internal
Organizations of the National Speleological Society
(NSS), but that has not always been the case. This ar-
ticle will attempt to chronicle the development issues
and victories won by the NCRC as it evolved into
what it is today. The opinions stated are completely
the author's, and right or wrong, are mine and mine
alone.
The buzz in the campground and in various dis-
cussions around the 1965 NSS Convention in Bloom-
ington, Indiana, was the recent tragedy in Schroders
Pants Cave in Manheim, New York, with the death
of James Mitchell. The attempted rescue and failed
body recovery was effected by the National Capital
Grotto Cave Rescue Team, out of Washington, D.C.,
led by Bill Karras. The general opinion was that the
group of cave rescue "heroes" swooping in on Air
Force 2 and the subsequent publicity were an em-
barrassment to the NSS as a whole. In contrast, two
weeks prior to the convention, Jim Dowling, from
Connersville, Indiana, was rescued from Neffs Can-
yon Cave in Utah in a relatively complex multiday
operation performed by local agency and caver per-
sonnel. The ordeal made a small blip in the national
media and was barely mentioned in the convention
discussions.
Karras's general discord with several NSS direc-
tors led to his formation of the Speleological Society
of America (SSA) in 1966. In May 1967 three Hanni-
bal, Missouri, youths, Craig Dowell, 14, his brothers
Bill Hoag, 10, and Joey Hoag, 13, disappeared. A new
road cut near town had opened a cave entrance and
the boys were assumed to be in the cave. Karras, the
president of the SSA and chief of the rescue team, ar-
rived on scene and spent several days talking to the
media. The boys were never found. The media did
not distinguish between the SSA and the NSS. Once
again the excessive publicity of the fiasco added fuel
to the fire against the idea of a national cave rescue
team and cave rescue publicity. The situation reached
a point where the mention of cave rescue organiza-
tions or training resulted a in negative reaction from
the caving community.
Preparing to Win
Don Paquette NSS 8545
Things related to cave rescue on the national
level calmed down for the next 10 years with rescues
handled at the local level. Walker County Rescue in
Lafayette, Georgia, and Hamilton County Cave and
Cliff Rescue in Chattanooga, Tennessee, handled the
southeastern U.S. Chuck Hempel, Bob Barlow, and
others were doing weekend training in the eastern
U.S. Some Virginia cavers formed the Cave Rescue
Communication Network (CRCN). Triangle Rescue
was operating in southern Virginia, Eastern Tennes-
see, and North Carolina. Local cavers responded
when necessary in Indiana. A national rescue co-
ordinator, with vague duties and responsibilities,
was appointed in the NSS President's department.
Among those holding the position were Ken Laidlaw
from Berkley, California, and Don Black from Chat-
tanooga, Tennessee. The major problem of the era
was conflict between agency personnel, who were
legally responsible for public safety, and cavers, who
were knowledgeable and comfortable working in the
underground environment. Rumors persist amongst
cave rescue personnel today of cavers being held
back at gunpoint while police and firefighters severe-
ly complicated a relatively simple rescue.
In 1976, Dan Smith, a Fire Department Train-
ing Captain and caver from Petaluma, California,
came up with the idea of forming a commission in
the NSS to focus on joint training of agency person-
nel and cavers in cave rescue operations and man-
agement techniques. This would help to "grease the
skids" between cavers and agencies for future rescue
operations. He further divided the country into sepa-
rate regions, each headed by a local commissioner,
to coordinate resources. The initial regional com-
missioners were Rick Rigg, Northwestern; Howard
Hurtt, Western; Perry Denton, Southwestern; Steve
Hudson, Southeastern; Gene Harrison, Eastern; Karl
Kingsley, Northeastern; and Doug Carter, Canada.
The Central Region was vacant. Terry Jones, from
Texas, was appointed the NCRC's Deputy Director
in 1978. Smith was the National Commissioner. The
title of Commissioner was soon changed to Coordi-
nator. The first national training seminar, a five-day
event, was held in San Antonio, Texas, the week prior
to the 1978 NSS Convention in New Braunfels, Texas.
The principle instructors were Smith; Hudson; Butch
Farabee, Chief Rescue Ranger at Grand Canyon Na-
tional Park; Tom Vines; and Dr. John Franklin, Leader
of England's Cave Rescue Organization (CRO). The
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 10 ----------
training consisted of lecture and fieldwork culminat-
tion the following week. Evidently Smith had made
ing in a mock rescue in a commercial cave on the last
some unauthorized travel expenditures for NCRC
day. The stretcher used was a modified Neill-Robert-
activities. There were also fears that Smith was try-
son litter, a conglomeration of wood slats attached to
ing to form a national cave rescue team. Ghosts of the
a metal frame originally used for evacuating sailors
Bill Karras past still lingered with the masses. This
through tight ship hatches.
resulted in the "Albany Coup." Hudson, Noon, and
I first got involved with cave rescue shortly af-
I worked with Russ Rhodes to write the new NCRC
ter I started caving, in 1961. Living in Bloomington,
Charter. It emphasized that the NCRC did not per-
Indiana, very close to the Garrison Chapel Ridge and
form cave rescues; its main purpose was training,
Buckner Cave area, put me into a cave search group
resource coordination, and management; and final-
by default. I participated in many searches, rescued
ly all financial transactions would be accomplished
those who could not climb out of Shaft Pit, and as-
through the NSS treasurer. Chuck Hempel, a caver
sisted with the triple body recovery from the Sala-
from the Eastern Region, was conducting some res-
mander Cave flood of 1976. When I would bring up
cue training, but had a few major philosophical dif-
the subjects of rescue practice, preparation, or train-
ferences with other caving groups and the NCRC. We
ing around the campfire or at caver parties, the "older
decided it would be better to work with, rather than
and wiser" cavers would always reject these ideas.
compete with, Hempel's group, SO we suggested
Ghosts of the Bill Karras past still lingered with the
that he replace Noon as Eastern Region Coordinator.
masses.
Noon would replace Smith as National Coordinator,
Smith presented a paper on the National Cave
and Smith would become Western Region Coordina-
Rescue Commission at the 1978 NSS Convention
tor. We approached Smith with the new charter and
in New Braunfels, Texas, and I attended. My first
suggested restructuring, and we informed him that
impression of Smith was that if he was not a used
if the changes did not occur, our group was sure we
car salesman, he had definitely missed his calling.
would lose the NCRC. He reluctantly agreed. The fol-
Smooth talking and persuasive, his message was ex-
lowing week at the convention, Hudson and I spent
citing and made a lot of sense. He spoke of training
the entire week lobbying directors to adopt the new
and preparation, resource management and caver-
charter and give the NCRC one more chance. They
agency cooperation, and all the rest of the cave res-
did.
cue-related topics I had been espousing back home.
After the presentation, I asked Smith who the Central
long Training Seminar was successful. It was the first
Region Coordinator was. He asked me where I was
Level 2 class. Everyone went to the same lectures.
from, and I said, "Bloomington, Indiana." He smiled,
Level 1 students were assigned to a Level 2 team
looked me straight in the eye, and said, "You are."
leader on the first day and stayed with the team the
In December 1978 Chris Kerr broke his leg in
entire week. The instruction format was all day class-
Cueva del Brinco in Mexico. The NCRC coordinat-
room alternating with all day fieldwork. The Octo-
ed an Air National Guard C-130 flight to take sev-
ber 1977 rescue at Twigg's Cave in Maryland was a
eral cavers and a 4-wheel drive vehicle from Austin,
major topic of conservation. The problems discussed
Texas, to Victoria, Tamaulipas. Kerr was successfully
from the Twigg's rescue were bad air, tight vertical
rescued. This was the first personnel and equipment
passages, and personnel shortages. The mock rescue
resource transfer aided by the NCRC and was some-
from the training seminar that year was in McFails
what tricky, because it involved flying a military
Cave. It started at 8:00 p.m. on Thursday night rath-
plane into Mexico as a rapid response.
er than Friday morning as in past years. A four to
In March 1979 Barry Beck and six students were
one piggyback haul system was rigged at the Hall's
rescued from Anderson Spring Cave near Lafayette,
Hole entrance, and mock patient John Mylroie was
Georgia, after being trapped by floodwaters for 33
successfully extracted at the break of dawn. During
hours. The NCRC aided in coordinating the flight of
the evacuation, Level 1 student and future instruc-
Dr. Bill Clem, rescue personnel, and a warm gas in-
tor Tom Patterson was instrumental in developing
halator for hypothermia intervention from Virginia
the turtle carry for litter transport in narrow canyon
by the Air Force. It was the second personnel and
passage.
equipment resource transfer aided by the NCRC.
Smooth-talking salesmanship is one thing, but
rescue at the 1980 NCRC National Weeklong Train-
competent financial management is another. When I
ing Seminar in Chattanooga, Tennessee. The mock
arrived at the 1979 national training seminar in Al-
patient was a fairly big guy, well over six feet tall.
bany, New York, and met Hudson and Lee Noon, the
He was placed at the bottom of the Nuisance Drop,
new Eastern Region Coordinator, I discovered the
an 18-foot drop, between the Warm Up Pit and the
NSS Board of Governors had decided to disband the
Balcony of Fantastic Pit in Ellison's Cave. Once
NCRC at the Pittsfield, Massachusetts, NSS Conven-
again the mock was started on Thursday evening
American Caving Accidents
The Albany, New York, NCRC National Week-
However, there were problems with the mock

---------- Page 11 ----------
Instructors Steve Hudson and Dr. Bill Clem demonstrate the operation of a 4:1 piggyback haul system at the 1979 National
Weeklong Training Seminar in Albany, NY. Photo by Don Paquette.
when everyone was tired, rather than Friday morn-
ing. After several failed attempts to get the litter over
the Nuisance Drop lip, the mock patient quit and left
the cave. The mock was aborted. The class and the
instructors were very disappointed with the result.
The 1981 NCRC National Weeklong Training
Seminar in Bloomington, Indiana, was an interna-
tional training in conjunction with the International
Congress of Speleology held the following week in
Bowling Green, Kentucky. Several Level 1 students
were to play key roles in the future of the NCRC in-
cluding Dr. Noel Sloan from Indianapolis, Indiana;
Bill Renaker from Fox Lake, Illinois; and Harold
Chrimes from Troutdale, Virginia. Frank Reid from
Bloomington, Indiana, was invited as a guest lecturer
on amateur radio two-meter repeaters and the use of
cave radio location equipment for two-way commu-
nication between the underground and the surface.
Reid enjoyed the seminar SO much that he continued
to teach and contribute until he passed away in 1998.
The first Manual of U.S. Cave Rescue Techniques, edited
by Toni Williams was published and given to the stu-
dents. We decided that the NCRC needed a Training
Coordinator and asked Dave Morrow, an instructor
from Virginia, to take the position. Once again the
mock rescue, held in Doghill Cave in Bedford, Indi-
ana, was started on Thursday evening. During the
mock, the next-door neighbor of the cave owner came
home around midnight with a somewhat inebriated
wife who called the local police and demanded that
the training course personnel be evicted from the
premises immediately. Negotiations with the re-
sponding officer allowed us to stay, as long as ev-
eryone remained quiet. One of the unique things
about the international seminar was that several of
the students were actually very experienced rescuers
in their own countries. At the mock, Mike Meredith
from France led the first team into the cave. We called
them "Bash Teams." It took a few years to replace
"Bash" with the more conservation-leaning "Initial
Response." When he returned, during his debrief,
he pulled a notebook from his pocket where he had
drawn a very accurate sketch map of the entire cave
from the entrance to the patient, and noted every
obstacle and what would be needed for evacuation,
much to the amazement of the observing instruc-
tors. When Meredith paid a return visit to the United
States the following year, we used him for an instruc-
tor at the California weeklong event.
The NCRC National Weeklong Training Semi-
nars continued with modifications to the training.
The seminar schedule was changed to include a
morning classroom and an afternoon fieldwork com-
ponent. The SKED® litter and Oregon Spine Splint
replaced the very awkward Neill-Robertson litter. In
1982, we finally started the mock on Friday morning.
During the mock rescue at Wind Cave, the haul sys-
tem main anchor moved, resulting in the mock being
aborted for safety. In 1982, Noon resigned as Nation-
al Coordinator, due to job commitments, and was
replaced by Vines. Getting instructors was at times
challenging. The only remuneration provided to in-
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 12 ----------
structors was the meal plan, provided the class was
Coordinators (BORC) arrive at a consensus?"
large enough to support it. All instructors paid their
own travel and lodging expenses, as they continue
Brett Marsh, Leroy Vargas, and George Marquez-
to do today. Agency students were frequently subsi-
enrolled in a Level 1 at the 1986 NCRC Weeklong
dized by their departments, but we had to keep the
Training Seminar in Carlsbad, New Mexico. Denni-
cost as low as possible to attract cavers, who were fre-
son was a paramedic instructor with a lot of experi-
quently poor college students. Ideally, we wanted to
ence with curriculum development, and he became
have a caver/agency personnel ratio of 50:50 in each
an instructor and did a lot of work with the curricu-
class. Another problem was getting good publicity
lum. After the seminar, I drove home with the com-
into the caving community while maintaining a very
plete national training equipment cache in the back
low profile, as the ghosts of the Bill Karras past still
of my pick-up truck. We were still teaching only
lingered with the masses. Despite these problems,
two levels, but many graduates were clamoring for
we managed to break even and frequently create a
a Level 3. It had been and was being discussed, but
small surplus to replenish equipment without get-
any kind of agreement was in the mist. Bill Renaker
ting any money from the NSS.
replaced Dave Morrow as Training Coordinator.
Precinct #11 Cave in Rockcastle County, Ken-
tucky, flooded in April 1983 trapping eight mem-
in Abingdon, Virginia, instructor Tom Patterson ar-
bers of the Greater Cincinnati Grotto. With NCRC
rived with check-off sheets for students to demon-
support, the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center
strate skills in patient packaging, haul and lower-
(AFRCC) flew cave divers Steve Maegerlien and Jeff
ing systems rigging, knot tying, communications
Forbes from Bloomington, Indiana, and Hudson and
equipment operation, and medical assessments. This
Forrest Wilson from Marietta, Georgia, to London,
was well received by the students. They enjoyed the
Kentucky. The successful multiday rescue taught
hands-on activities and felt like it enhanced learning.
us that huge pumps can help with a flooded cave
On the drive home, while thinking about the success
and not to place internal combustion engines near a
of the check-off sheets, I had an epiphany: NCRC
flooded entrance. If the siphon breaks and the cave
should create hard documentation of each student's
is sucking air, the carbon monoxide exhaust will be
skills proficiency. We could keep and file check-off
sucked into the cave. It was a successful demonstra-
sheets. We could claim that we were the most knowl-
tion of interregional cooperation and use of AFRCC
edgeable about cave rescue, and if any one disagreed,
and sump divers.
they would be challenged to prove us wrong! Also we
In 1984, Vines resigned, and I replaced him as
needed to get the curriculum-development person-
National Coordinator. Dr. Noel Sloan replaced me
nel into a smaller group. At the NSS Convention in
as Central Region Coordinator. By charter, we were
Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, I presented my thoughts
required to have a meeting at the NSS Convention.
to the BORC. First, we will create an Education Board
We also had a business meeting during the winter.
to get the curriculum developed. The members will
In working to develop a standard curriculum, vol-
be the National Coordinator, the Training Coordina-
unteers would commit to a topic but normally fail to
tor, the Medical Officer, and two at-large members
follow through. We were all volunteers with jobs and
who are not regional coordinators. This small group
families and other lives. Progress was slow on the
will get people to develop lesson plans and submit
second edition of the manual. With all of us coming
them to the Education Board for review. Once a
from different parts of the country and having differ-
lesson plan is complete, it will be submitted to the
ent rescue problems and needs, getting a consensus
BORC for approval. The Education Board will also
on curriculum and policies was almost impossible.
develop the criteria for instructor certification and re-
This was the time before e-mail, SO communication
certification. Second, each coordinator would submit
was by mail, expensive long distance telephone, or
no more that three candidates to be grandfathered as
face to face. Setting up a seminar by typewriter and
certified instructors for a period of three years. Each
telephone was almost a full time job. Our meetings
candidate must have taught previously at a National
turned into major arguments, and progress came to
Weeklong Seminar. After three years they must meet
a halt. Another problem discussed was agency stu-
the requirements developed by the Education Board
dents wanting more than a certificate of attendance.
to recertify.
We passed a policy that the NCRC logo would not be
made into a patch or used on clothing in order to keep
thered instructors were submitted as requested, ex-
our profile low. What kept working on my mind was,
cept that Hempel submitted 27 names of instructors
"Who certified us to certify them? What standards
he used for Eastern Region training-none of whom
do we use? How do we document training? How do
had ever taught at a national weeklong seminar. One
we keep the necessary records? What records do we
of the individuals submitted was offended for not
keep? How can 13 members of the Board of Regional
being selected. He was a highly skilled ropes techni-
American Caving Accidents
Four paramedics from Texas-Rod Dennison,
At the 1987 NCRC Weeklong Training Seminar
At the winter meeting the names for grandfa-

---------- Page 13 ----------
cian and a radio communication expert who taught
for several years in the region, but he had not taught
at a national weeklong seminar. He went to the NSS
Board of Governors and accused the NCRC of con-
ducting secret meetings and demanded that he be
grandfathered as a certified instructor. In subsequent
discussions with several directors and a meeting
with Tom Rea, NSS Administrative Vice-President,
I assured them that we never had any secret meet-
ings. He simply did not meet our selection criteria
because he had never taught at a national weeklong
seminar. Their review of our policies determined
that we needed to correct the fact that none of the
coordinators had any term limits. Each coordinator,
except the National Coordinator, would have a three-
year term, with potential replacements to be nomi-
nated by their region. The BORC would recommend
the coordinator for confirmation by the NSS Board
of Governors (BOG). There would be no limit on the
number of terms. The BORC decided to certify only
instructors, but to issue certificates of completion to
the students.
Many viewed the NCRC as a group of squab-
bling egomaniacs who wanted to save the world.
In one sense they were correct. We were definitely
squabbling. The Eastern Region wanted NCRC as-
sociation, but also wanted autonomy. Some of the
differences were far reaching. The charter mandated
that we maintain a low profile. The Eastern Region
liked patches, stickers, and publicity. They wanted
vertical requirements to be optional for both students
and instructors. The arguments over grandfathering
instructors continued for over three years, until 1990.
The region was doing some good training, but want-
ing it both ways slighted several BORC members.
The 1988 NCRC Weeklong Training Seminar at
Wind Cave National Park saw the first Level 3. We
had a small overall class, SO during the mock, a few of
the instructors participated with the students to bol-
ster the cadre of rescuers. The second edition of the
Manual of U.S. Cave Rescue Techniques, edited by Steve
Hudson was published.
The 1989 Monteagle, Tennessee, weeklong estab-
lished the beginning of instructor training. Rod Den-
nison put together and taught a two-day pre-seminar
course consisting of construction and use of course
objectives and goals, use of audio-visual equipment,
construction of lesson plans, types of tests, and test
construction, with each person doing an evaluated
mini-presentation. This evolved over the next few
years into the Instructor Qualification (IQ) class, the
weeklong course that prepares instructors for certifi-
cation by the BORC.
In 1991, Emily Davis Mobley broke her leg dur-
ing an expedition in Lechuguilla Cave. The result-
ing rescue took four days. During the operation Ron
Kerbo called me looking for a phone patch, a device
that connects the field phones in the cave to a radio
on the surface, thus allowing someone in the cave
to communicate directly with the remote command
center. I contacted Frank Reid, and he faxed a sche-
matic diagram of the circuit and a parts list to Kerbo.
The parts were bought at a local Radio Shack, and the
patch was constructed and used for the remainder of
the operation. This is yet another example of NCRC
providing resource management.
One of the problems with our training was
dispatching the class for the mock rescue. The class
would completely organize the night before with
all job responsibilities pre-assigned and then arrive
at the cave as one big group. In reality, cave rescues
evolve with people arriving as they get notified with
variable travel time. At the 1991 Schoharie, New York,
weeklong seminar, Bill Renaker arrived at the Friday
morning dispatch meeting with a box of plastic pok-
er chips. Each student had to draw a red, white, or
blue poker chip out of a hat. This randomly divided
the class into three groups that were dispatched 30
minutes apart, providing a much more realistic be-
ginning.
At the NSS Convention the following week in
Cobleskill, New York, I asked Hudson if he would
take over as National Coordinator. The NCRC was
progressing pretty well, we needed a new Medical
Officer, and I was getting burned out. Dr. Sloan be-
came the Medical Officer, and I would return as Cen-
tral Region Coordinator. Hudson agreed to take the
position for a couple of years.
Anmar Mirza came to the 1992 NCRC Weeklong
Training Seminar Marengo, Indiana, as a Level 1 stu-
dent. Anmar was an Emergency Medical Technician
(EMT), amateur radio operator, and caver, and he
had been assisting with Central Region Orientation
to Cave Rescue (OCR) courses for the past few years.
He had more actual cave rescue experience than most
of the instructors on site. As an early 20-something,
he had a fairly short fuse, and I think that at least
three or four times during the week I had to stop him
from packing up and leaving the class. His frustration
was the result of a situation that was starting to brew.
We were instructor-heavy with some that should not
have been cleared to be instructors. The process at
the time was simply to take Levels 1, 2, and 3, then
go to instructor training, and immediately you were
an instructor. Over the years, word got out to many
agencies that the NCRC training was an inexpensive
but high-quality high angle rescue course. We were
getting instructors that did not live anywhere near a
caving area and only came near a cave at a seminar.
Between seminars, their knowledge of the curricu-
lum and the specifics of cave rescue would dimin-
ish. This would result in conflicts between instruc-
tors and students. Also, this seminar made enough
money to allow the NCRC to purchase a trailer for
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 14 ----------
transportation of the rapidly growing training equip-
the Bill Karras past are fading away, but they are not
ment cache. Chrimes would keep and maintain the
completely gone. Many people still think the NCRC
cache at his home in Virginia.
is a rescue team!
In 1992, the Eastern Region began teaching a
weeklong seminar at the Old Timer's Reunion (OTR)
cause of the hard, unpaid, volunteer work of count-
site in West Virginia. The BORC approved the train-
less people. Dan Smith got it all started. We are still
ing for Levels 1 and 2.
using his regional division system. Dr. John Franklin,
In 1994, Hudson resigned as National Coordi-
from England, taught at our first three national week-
nator and was replaced by Butch Feldhaus. David
longs. Steve Hudson, one of the founders, at one time
Ashburn replaced Renaker as Training Coordinator.
or another held every NCRC management position,
Feldhaus and the BORC developed an adversarial
edited the second edition of the manual, provided
relationship over the next few years. The NSS BOG
unparalleled vertical expertise, and gave more hours
extended the term limits to include the National Co-
than probably anyone. Rod Dennison got us off the
ordinator. At the end of his term, Feldhaus resigned
ground with proper lesson planning and curriculum
and was replaced by John Punches.
development. He, along with Jim Davis, was also
In 2005, the Education Board addressed the
instrumental in the development of Level 3. Harold
instructor quality issues. In addition to attending
Chrimes has spent years managing the national train-
periodic instructor curriculum updates and teach-
ing cache and continues to do SO. Diane Cousineau
ing, each instructor must now pass a written exam
significantly refined the IQ class. The late Frank Reid
on NCRC policies and curriculum every three years.
developed the communications training that we still
The selection criteria for students to enter the instruc-
use. Chuck Hempel developed the model we still use
tor training class were refined and tightened. This
for the weekend Orientation to Cave Rescue course.
rapidly thinned the instructor pool, as only those
Jeff Parnell started the work on the third edition of
who really wanted to teach would expend the effort
the manual. John Punches has provided tremendous
to bone up on the curriculum to pass the exam.
leadership and demanded instructor professionalism
In 2009, John Punches resigned as National Co-
both as National Coordinator and now as Training
ordinator and was replaced by Mirza. Hudson re-
Coordinator. Anmar Mirza used innovative creativ-
placed Ashburn as Training Coordinator.
ity to refine Level 2 and continues to provide great
In 2010, a class called Tactical Operation and
leadership as National Coordinator. The late Joe Ivy
Field Exercises (TOFE) was first offered at the Men-
worked along with Becky Jones and Tom Burroughs
tone, Alabama, Weeklong. It is a fun class for students
in starting the coursework for SPAR. My two contri-
who have completed Level 2 or above and consists of
butions were creating the Education Board and keep-
a week of hands on fieldwork.
ing Anmar from quitting as a Level 1 student.
In December 2013, the NCRC suffered a great
loss with the untimely passing of Hudson. Since its
with a little cave rescue experience, a little teaching
beginning in 1978, Hudson was the backbone of the
experience, and the desire to fill a void and solve
commission. His technical knowledge, experience,
some existing problems in the caving community.
and leadership coupled with plain hard work will
We based a lot of our early classes on mountain res-
be sorely missed. The Training Coordinator position
cue techniques, existing medical protocols, military
was filled by Punches.
communications, and fire service Incident Command
The NCRC has continued to improve and thrive.
System (ICS) management. Some of the stuff worked,
In recent years, we have considered offering a Wil-
some did not. As we taught, we learned. We devel-
derness First Responder class. Requests for a small
oped cave-specific techniques. We had failures and
party self-rescue course have been around since the
successes. Each region had different kinds of caves
beginning and many people have worked on it for
and different kinds of problems, including deep pits
years. It is now being offered as a three-day course
in the southeast, tight passage in the northeast, water
called Small Party Assisted Rescue (SPAR). The third
in the central U.S., and long distances between peo-
edition of the Manual of U.S. Cave Rescue Techniques,
ple and caves in the west. We managed operations
edited by Mirza, was published in 2015. Possibly the
differently. We had personal preferences and biases.
greatest success has been reducing the caver-agency
Every mock rescue is a learning experience for both
disparity. Over the years, many agency individuals
the students and the instructors. We watched. We
have become recreational cavers, and likewise cav-
learned. We observed how the students absorbed
ers are getting advanced medical training and are
the material, and we listened to their complaints and
involved with emergency management. The divid-
requests. We argued among ourselves. Teaching a
ing line between "cavers and agency" is fading. The
curriculum that fits every part of the country is im-
NSS BOG has recently authorized the NCRC to pro-
possible, and teaching a solution for every possible
vide cave rescue certification for students. Ghosts of
problem to be encountered on a cave rescue is impos-
American Caving Accidents
The NCRC has gotten to where it is today be-
The NCRC was started by a group of people

---------- Page 15 ----------
sible. The Education Board developed standards for
the curriculum. These are training standards, not res-
cue standards. For every method we teach, there are
many other methods that work. Some better, some
worse, but on a given day in training a student was
taught and demonstrated a method that would work
in most cases, and that could be documented. Stan-
dards were developed for instructors, especially in
teaching the curriculum. Every instructor disagrees
with one or more things in the curriculum, but all
agree to teach it first and then present their own
opinion.
We continue to learn from mock rescues. We
continue to learn from real rescues. We continue to
observe students. We solicit feedback. Technology
advances. Philosophies change. We still have strong
differences of opinion. All of these things add up
to modifications to the curriculum. The Education
Board is constantly revising what is taught and when.
Whether it is a weekend Orientation to Cave Rescue,
a Regional Seminar, or the full National Weeklong
Training Seminar, we have enlightened thousands of
cavers and agency personnel about the nature of cave
Cavers participating in an NCRC training seminar. Photo by Mike Futrell.
rescue and taught some tools that might work, de-
pending on the situation. Almost every rescue is now
handled on the local level and with the lowest profile
possible. Are we fully prepared? No. Will we ever be
fully prepared? No. But we are more prepared now
than in the past. We will be better prepared to win in
the future than we are now.
Roman philosopher Seneca said, "Luck is what
happens when preparation meets opportunity."
Hopefully in future rescues we will get lucky.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 16 ----------
Dragon Cave: America's First Cave Rescue?
Dean H. Snyder NSS 17870
F
or the greater part of the nineteenth century,
aimlessly in the dark without finding the entrance
the most famous cave in Berks County, Penn-
passage. Several days later, a search party entered
sylvania, was found in a farmer's field a mile
the cave, and rescued the missing group. To make
northeast of Virginville in Richmond Township. Peo-
sure that they could find their way out the cave, the
ple from far and near, including Philadelphia and
search party tied one end of a long rope around one of
New York, visited the cave and wrote about it as a
them, and tied the other end to a tree on the surface.
great natural curiosity. Dragon Cave represents one
The unfortunate explorers were found with "their
of the earliest cave references in the United States; it
candles long since burned out, their nails scratched
appears on W. Scull's 1770 map of Pennsylvania. It
off, and their bodies not a little weakened."
may also be the site of the first cave rescue in North
America.
monwealth with a natural entrance; most caves in
Sometime around 1750, settlers from the village
Pennsylvania were found by quarry activities or dur-
of Oley went on a fishing trip to the Maiden Creek.
ing road construction. The main feature of the cave
The group stumbled upon the cave's entrance, but
is a large stalagmite, 4 feet thick at its base and 8 feet
without light sources, they could not go far into the
high. For many years during the nineteenth century,
cave. When the group returned later to explore more
it was a popular destination for visitors, many of
thoroughly, their candles went out. They wandered
whom spent the night at the nearby Dreibelbis Hotel.
A foot-square block of a white stalagmite from the
cave was proudly displayed at the hotel. However,
the Dreibelbis children were forbidden to explore the
cave -their elders had always talked of the 1750 res-
cue.
visited Dragon Cave with his township school stu-
dents. The cave was mapped by Mike Shaffner in
1932, with the map appearing in future NSS Presi-
dent Ralph W. Stone's Pennsylvania Caves. Another
NSS President, Charles Mohr, of the Reading Public
Museum, visited Dragon Cave with his nature class
in 1934. Dragon Cave was on the Dreibelbis family
property until the early 1940s, when it was sold to
George Lesher. Early on, he was very cordial to cave
explorers. But in the late 1970s, after some boorish
visitors drove through his yard to park at the cave
entrance, Lesher closed the cave to all visitation.
However, he refused to allow township officials
to physically close the cave, which they deemed in
their infinite wisdom to be dangerous. After Lesher's
death, the property was sold and became part of the
Dragons Den Residential Subdivision. With land-
owner permission, the cave remains open today.
Dean Snyder in the entrance of Dragon Cave, circa 2000. Photo courtesy
of Dean Snyder.
American Caving Accidents
Dragon Cave is one of the few caves in the com-
In the winter of 1892, Professor Lafayette Lesher

---------- Page 17 ----------
Perspectives on Cave Rescue Preplanning
John Punches NSS 39211 & Bonny Armstrong NSS 43003
T
lhe fact that you're reading this issue of American
Caving Accidents suggests you're either a caver
or someone tasked with managing rescues in
caves. In both cases, thinking about and preparing
for rescues will help you to address these challenging
situations more effectively and may help you avoid
the need for complicated rescues in the first place.
This article considers cave rescue preplanning from
a series of perspectives: the individual caver, the
person leading a caving trip, project and expedition
cavers, and the agency or organization responsible
for an organized cave rescue. We'll think about how
cavers can mitigate risk and ensure that they can care
for themselves to the maximum extent feasible, and
how agency or cave resource management personnel
can be best prepared for a rescue.
Caver Preparation
Typical cavers probably aren't thinking about
rescues when they plan a caving trip, but they should
be. Caves are challenging environments, and we
shouldn't brush off the possibility of a mishap. In
fact, we'd argue that it's irresponsible to go caving
without thinking through the objective hazards and
doing what you can to minimize risk.
The best way to avoid the need for a rescue is
to ensure that every member of your caving group
is properly prepared for the trip. What it takes to
be prepared depends on the cave trip itself. A stroll
through easy borehole may require little more prepa-
ration than calling the gang and throwing the gear
in the truck. In contrast, a multiday expedition in a
deep vertical cave could require months of pre-trip
personal and group effort to ensure all the bases are
covered. Preparation for any trip should start with a
clear understanding of the challenges that the cave
will (or could) present. Trip members should then
undertake appropriate physical conditioning and
ensure that their caving skillset is up to the task and
that all personal and group equipment is ready. The
following checklist will help you to cave safely-r
that it starts well in advance of the actual cave trip.
Checklist for Caver Preparation
Well in advance and ongoing:
Engage in regular physical activity. Cardiovascular
conditioning, strength, and agility are invaluable at-
tributes while caving, and they do much to mitigate
risk of injury.
Obtain and use cave-worthy clothing, footwear,
and protective equipment. Learn what is appropriate
for differing types of cave trips. Make sure your gear
works well for you.
Invest in high quality caving lights. Experiment
with them SO you'll know how long you can expect
batteries to last, and plan accordingly. Learn how to
implement field repairs. Always carry extra lights.
If you plan to engage in vertical caving, obtain a
real caving ascending system, seek qualified help
tuning it to your body size and configuration, and
practice until you can ascend, perform a changeover,
and descend smoothly. Learn how to pass knots, pro-
tect yourself on traverses and approach lines, transfer
from one rope to another, and downclimb. These are
essential skills that should be mastered before you
go in the cave. (See the Vertical Caving Notes, at the
conclusion of this article, for more on this subject.)
Prior to the trip:
Get details from your trip leader about what to ex-
pect (nature of cave, objectives, route, difficulty, du-
ration).
Check and pack gear, lights and supplies. Make
sure all is in good working order and that you have
everything needed.
Assemble a Palmer Furnace kit (large trash bag,
candle, flame source) and learn how to use it.
Tell friends and family where you are going, what
route you'll take to and in the cave, and when you an-
ticipate returning. Give them the contact information
for your surface watch (which should be established
by the trip leader).
Ensure that you are rested, hydrated, and as healthy
as possible. Starting a cave trip already fatigued or
dehydrated heightens your risk.
Pack sensibly. Carrying too much (weight or bulk)
can prevent you from moving efficiently. You'll wear
out sooner, and fatigue is a major precursor to caving
injuries.
Tell your caving companions and trip leader about
any medical conditions you have, what they should
watch for, and how they should assist you if need-
ed.
Know what to do if you get separated from your
caving group.
While caving:
Cave at an appropriate pace. Pushing physically and
mentally is why many of us go caving, but overdoing
it can put us at risk individually and as a group.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 18 ----------
Keep yourself fueled and hydrated.
(rope, rigging, task-oriented equipment).
Layer up or down SO you can move efficiently and
maintain a comfortable body temperature.
separated from the group.
Let your trip leader know if you're reaching your
limits or experiencing difficulty.
In the cave:
Pay attention to landmarks that will help you find
your way out.
too fast will put the slower members of your group
at higher risk. Emphasize efficiency of movement
Trip Leader Responsibilities
rather than outright speed.
You carry an extra burden if you are the trip
leader. Not only are you responsible for choosing the
thermia, illness, or injury.
cave and route and coordinating the trip, you are re-
sponsible for making sure that everyone on the trip is
properly prepared. Hasty preparation of your caving
could find their own way out if necessary.
team members probably means you're pushing them
to do things they're not ready for. Start new cavers
sion points. Demonstrate good vertical technique.
off with easy trips, and build up to more complexity
Avoid haste! Hasty rigging is too often inefficient or
as their skills and physical abilities improve. You can
allows unnecessary rope damage at friction points.
reduce risk and improve the success of your caving
trips by doing the following:
scene safety first. Stay calm, think, and perform
smoothly. Establish a clear chain of command and
In advance of the trip:
work as a team to resolve the issue. Expect emotions
Know the capabilities of the trip members.
to run high. Stay positive and be the calm and re-
Choose caves and routes appropriate for the par-
assuring voice in the midst of chaos. (A calm, reas-
ticipants.
suring, positive voice is the single best rescue tool,
Inform trip members about the cave and the nature
and it can resolve most incidents without the need
of the cave trip (difficulty, duration, etc.).
for escalation.)
Ensure that every member of the caving group has
proper equipment and personal supplies
Expedition and Project Caving
If the trip will include vertical caving, meet with (or
have a trusted assistant meet with) each trip mem-
or long-term exploration and mapping place them-
ber to ensure that they have functional and properly
selves in environments that could make rescue very
tuned vertical gear and that they can perform essen-
challenging. Their cave routes could include signifi-
tial skills.
cant depth with multiple challenging pitches, long
Make arrangements for your surface (safety) watch.
constrictions (horizontal or vertical), sumps requiring
Ensure that person knows your trip plans and when
technical diving, extended bolted climbs, and digs
and who to call for assistance. Communicate surface-
requiring shoring and stabilization. These are not the
watch information to trip members.
environments where we should be taking new cav-
Know if the cave has flooding or bad-air hazards.
ers; even experienced cavers should ensure they're
Watch weather and plan accordingly. Don't venture
well prepared for the physical, psychological, and
into flood-prone caves unless you have a clear weath-
logistical challenges they'll face. Since call-out rescue
er forecast-not only for the cave entrance but for the
would be difficult to obtain and conduct in these en-
entire watershed that feeds the cave.
vironments, the cavers themselves need to employ
Develop plans for what to do if trip members get
a high level of self-sufficiency. The National Cave
separated. Where will you regroup? How will you
Rescue Commission (NCRC) highly recommends
communicate if some team members need to leave
that expedition and project cavers obtain wilderness
the cave or alter their route? (You can easily encoun-
medical training and take a small party assisted res-
ter these situations if you have fast cavers and slow
cue (SPAR) class. These classes prepare cavers to deal
cavers moving at different paces and planning to re-
with many illness- ar injury-related incidents with-
group at some location, or if you're surveying or con-
out the delays and complexities of a call-out rescue
ducting research or exploration in multiple groups.)
and help them to know when to attempt self-rescue,
when to do small party rescue, and when to call out
At the cave (or the start of the hike to the cave):
for more help.
Ensure that each trip member is properly equipped
and supplied.
Other Considerations for Technical Caving
Review the trip plan.
Ensure that you have all necessary group gear
have more loose rocks and a higher risk of rock fall,
American Caving Accidents
Remind trip members what to do if they become
Set an appropriate pace. Moving through the cave
Monitor trip members for signs of fatigue, hypo-
Incorporate rest and refueling breaks.
Point out landmarks along the route SO that others
Rig properly. Provide for edge safety. Protect abra-
If a teammate is injured, follow protocol. Assess
Cavers engaged in multiday expeditions and/
Anticipate that virgin or little-traveled passage will

---------- Page 19 ----------
that hand and footholds will be prone to breakage,
and that chock-stone features could fail under your
weight. In heavily traveled passages, other cavers
have probably "cleaned" the route for you. If you're
working in less traveled areas, you should be more
cautious.
Rig your trade routes in anticipation of a rescue-or
at least ensure that they are suitable for multi-person
loads. This makes it much easier to assist an injured
colleague through technical sections of passage. This
can include making modifications to constrictions in
advance rather than waiting until a rescue or assist is
needed. Rescue-worthy rigging and passage modifi-
cation have the added benefits of speeding up travel
through these areas and reducing the effort and com-
plexity of travel (and thus reducing the risk of injury
or fatigue-related problems).
Pre-position cave rescue equipment, food, water,
shelter, and insulation at logical locations in the cave.
A warming kit near your dig or bolting site, and extra
rope near vertical pitches, can be invaluable. The types
of equipment you'll need will depend on the nature
of the cave, how easy it would be to obtain equip-
ment and supplies from the surface, and the objec-
tives of your caving activities. We encourage you to be
thoughtful and to plan for reasonable contingencies.
Caves can be challenging and unpredictable. Cavers can mitigate risk through preparation, training, and thoughtful planning. Photo by Chris Higgins.
If you are modifying cave passage, particularly
if through digging or blasting, make sure you have
qualified personnel guiding those efforts. Spend time
evaluating the rock or other material you 11 be remov-
ing and think about what happens to overlying ma-
terial once you remove something. You may need to
shore up areas with wood or rock (much as would
occur in a mine).
Long trips underground require us to deal with
human waste. Ideally, you'd pack it out, but this
may not always be feasible. If you dispose of human
waste in the cave, be very careful you don't inadver-
tently contaminate your underground water sources.
You'l need to be very cognizant of the cave's hydrol-
ogy and take measures to prevent spread of waste-
born disease on footwear, clothing, or skin (hands).
If you need to drink from in-cave water sources, filter
or purify your water.
Fatigue can be a huge issue for expedition and push
cavers. Manage it by balancing cave pack weight ver-
sus number of trips, pacing yourselves, and break-
ing large groups into smaller units (with people who
move at similar speeds) to minimize delay at vertical
pitches and constrictions. It's also important to plan
for (and take) rest days when needed. Pushing too
close to your limits is an invitation for an accident.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 20 ----------
Finally, know who to contact if you need rescue
certed preplanning approach is advised.
assistance. In expedition and project caving, your
best rescue resource may be other cavers associated
mitting systems that screen out ill-equipped and inex-
with the mission who are on scene and either on the
perienced persons/groups can significantly mitigate
surface or elsewhere in the cave. Most rescue teams,
potential in-cave injuries, and they have the added
even if they specialize in cave rescue, are unlikely to
benefit of protecting cave resources and wildlife.
have any significant number of members who are
Responsible cavers will not be significantly inconve-
well prepared for the extremes they would encoun-
nienced by having to obtain a gate key or complete a
ter doing a rescue from deep within a cave system.
permit application.
Encourage your expedition/project caving compan-
ions to obtain cave rescue training, ask competent
natural resource managers are well acquainted with
colleagues to be on call during your cave trip, and
topographic maps of surface features, and these
consider installing wired communication SO that you
maps are essential tools for surface search and rescue
can request surface resources in a timely manner.
efforts. Cave maps are a bit more complex-they rep-
Vertical caving skills such as ascending, rappelling, performing change-overs, downclimbing, and passing knots should be practiced extensively in a
controlled environment before attempting in a cave. Photo by Chris Higgins.
Agency/Cave Management Rescue Preplanning:
resent three-dimensional spaces that may overlap or
Organizations that manage caves will benefit
intersect and that have varying passage dimensions
from planning and preparing for potential cave res-
and formation types. Effective management of cave
cue incidents. At a most basic level, this involves
rescue incidents depends upon good maps. Caving
knowing the cave's level of complexity, the compe-
groups (grottos) are often very willing to assist with
tency of people who tend to visit the cave, the cave's
cave mapping projects, and modern mapping tools
history of accidents and lost person events, and who
and software allow us to produce accurate and func-
to call upon to perform rescues in the cave. For easy
tional cave maps.
caves, this cursory information may be sufficient, but
for complex, lengthy, or vertical caves, a more con-
both caving and rescue skills; and aboveground res-
American Caving Accidents
Consider restricting cave access. Gates and per-
Develop or obtain accurate cave maps. Most
Cave rescue personnel must be competent in

---------- Page 21 ----------
cuers are not automatically the best choice for under-
ground incidents. Know where to get these people.
Invite them to visit your cave, get to know it and its
rigging challenges, and understand your incident
management system. You can accomplish this by
establishing working relationships with local cav-
ers/grottos and rescue agencies. Prepare cavers to
work effectively under your chain of command. Pre-
pare rescuers to be effective in the cave environment
(insist they be properly equipped and able to move
effectively in-cave). If you are an agency that both
manages caves and performs cave rescues, invest the
time and funds necessary to ensure that your person-
nel are properly trained and equipped for the unique
requirements of cave rescue.
If you're accustomed to managing aboveground
incidents, anticipate that cave incidents will have
less efficient communications, require a higher level
of inter-task collaboration, and that personnel may
need to shift from one task to another as the mission
unfolds underground. A search team may initiate
medical treatment, then be absorbed into an evacua-
tion task force. They will all rely on the communica-
tions system established and staffed by others, and
they will likely need the support of rigging personnel
to overcome obstacles.
Test your incident management procedures us-
ing mock rescues in your caves. You will probably
find that you need to tweak your management struc-
ture for it to work effectively for cave incidents. An-
ticipate the need for wired communication systems
(UHF and VHF radios have limited range under-
ground). Establish entrance control to manage and
document personnel ingress and egress, and to keep
persons not involved in the rescue from interfering.
Adapt search techniques to the cave environment.
Have a cave rescue cache suited to your cave. Antici-
pate that some rescue equipment may be best staged
in the cave, but rotate it out periodically for inspec-
tion and cleaning. Seal in-cave equipment to protect
it from moisture and decay. Rotate out water and
food items and any expired medical supplies.
Develop specific rigging preplans for major ac-
cess routes in cave. Test the plans and refine them.
This will save critical time and enhance safety during
actual rescues.
In some cases, a cave destination accessible to
healthy cavers may be impassable to a litter. Know
this in advance. In many cases, it will be acceptable to
remove the patient from the litter to get them through
a restriction. Your preplan should identify appropri-
ate alternatives.
Some passages will be SO restrictive that you'll
have to modify them in order to get an injured per-
son through them. Identifying theses passages in ad-
vance is important. If the passage is on a major route,
we recommend that it be modified in advance SO that
a rescue could be performed if needed. If the route
is used infrequently, or would be easy to modify in
the event of a rescue, have a plan for what needs to
be done and ensure that you have the tools and re-
sources (and skilled personnel) readily available. If
the restrictive route can be avoided, plan an alterna-
tive exit path.
The NCRC, while not a cave rescue team itself,
trains hundreds of persons in cave rescue techniques
annually and maintains caches of specialized cave
rescue equipment. Agencies and cave management
organizations can call upon the NCRC to help them
identify trained personnel as a part of preplanning
efforts, and its cave rescue equipment can be made
available for incidents. We encourage rescue plan-
ners to contact their NCRC Regional Coordinator
well in advance of actual incident needs, SO that ap-
propriate call-out and equipment sharing protocols
can be implemented. Coordinator contact informa-
tion is available at NCRC.info.
Vertical Caving Notes
If you travel almost anywhere else in the world,
cavers use standardized personal vertical systems
and are trained to specific standards before their cav-
ing associations allow them to do much in the verti-
cal environment. Not SO in the United States. Here
we tend to build our own unique ascending systems
out of whatever parts are available shiny), and it's
not uncommon for someone to begin vertical caving
with no formal single-rope-technique (SRT) training
whatsoever. It's not our intent to force standardiza-
tion upon American cavers, but we'd like to make an
appeal for a few things that can significantly improve
personal SRT safety.
First, use only static kernmantle rope with a tight-
ly woven sheath when rigging fixed lines for in-cave
vertical pitches. Limit use of dynamic (rock-climbing)
ropes to actual lead climbing activities and never de-
pend on hardware store utility rope. Cave ropes tend
to be stiff (which some people don't like), but that stiff-
ness results from the rope's dense sheath, which im-
proves abrasion resistance and actually makes climb-
ing with a caving ascending system easier and more
efficient. Invest in good rope, treat it well, and you'll
be able to use it safely for many, many trips.
Use a real caving ascending system. Cave en-
vironments are challenging, and ascending systems
cobbled together out of miscellaneous rock-climbing
and/or rescue equipment are unlikely to serve you
well. The NCRC strongly recommends each caver ob-
tain one of the following systems: frog, Mitchell, Tex-
as, or single or double bungee ropewalker. These are
arguably the most common systems for caving. They
should incorporate two gripping points of attachment
(toothed ascenders) connected to the main rigging
point on the wearer's harness.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 22 ----------
If you're using the frog system (which has be-
come common in the U.S.), get a real caving harness.
cal experiences, rig for contingencies. Use a rope a bit
Trying to adapt a rock-climbing or alpine harness for
more than twice the length of the pitch, and connect
use in the frog system generally results in an ineffi-
it to the anchor using a tied off Münter hitch (or simi-
cient (and therefore higher risk) ascending system.
lar) with the extra rope at the top of the pitch. Then, if
In all of these systems, we encourage you to
a person becomes stranded on rope, you can release
incorporate a pair of cowstails. These are short lan-
the hitch and lower them to the ground.
yards that connect to the main point on your harness
and have a carabiner at the other end. They serve as
Summary
safety lanyards for traverses and approach lines, and
in some systems they do double duty as the connec-
and a close second is a rescue that can be performed
tion to one of the system's ascenders. The short one
quickly, with minimal personnel and as little distur-
is typically about 2/3 of the length of your forearm,
bance to the cave as possible. Thoughtful planning
and the long one should reach from your harness
for caving trips, coupled with personal investment
to about the brim of your helmet. The exact lengths
in physical conditioning and caving skill building,
depend on your body configuration and the type of
can do much to reduce risk to cavers. While every
ascending system you're using.
caver should take personal responsibility for their
Seek expert guidance on how to tune your climb-
own preparations, trip leaders have additional re-
ing system to your body. There is no standard length
sponsibilities and should invest the time to ensure
for cowstails, footloops, or other ascending system
that their caving trip participants are ready for what-
components. You need to adjust them to match your
ever is planned for them. Start new cavers off with
torso, leg, and arm lengths. (In the authors' many
easy trips, and work up to greater challenges as their
years of caving and rescue experience, our observa-
skills mature. Expedition and project cavers need to
tion is that most U.S. cavers, even those with lots of
treat rescue as their own responsibility, within rea-
vertical experience, have poorly tuned systems. This
son. They put themselves in places that would be
makes climbing and other simple SRT actions inef-
very challenging for most rescue teams to access, SO
ficient and can make SRT rescue skills nearly impos-
they need to plan and prepare accordingly. Agencies
sible to perform. Attend an NCRC or NSS Vertical
and other cave rescue managers are encouraged to
Section SRT class for expert assistance with system
treat rescue preplanning as an essential element of
tuning.)
the resource management responsibilities. At all lev-
Use descent devices designed for caving, such
els, planning and preparing in advance of the trip or
as the rack or microrack, or bobbin-type devices sim-
incident is the key to success.
ilar to the Petzl STOP or Simple. Practice with them
on stiff, muddy caving rope and learn how to lock
them off. Too many people try to use rock-climbing
rappel or belay devices (like ATCs or GriGris) for
caving. This is a potentially dangerous situation, as
the gear simply isn't designed for the extremes of the
cave environment and may not function effectively
in your time of need.
When you clip into a horizontal line (such as a
traverse or approach line), clip in with a carabiner to
the rope rather than just a toothed ascender. Toothed
ascenders are not designed for transverse loads, and if
cross-loaded they can detach from, or even sever, the
rope under shock load. This is precisely the situation
in which we often see them used improperly a caver
will ascend to the top of a pitch, then clip one of their
ascenders into a horizontal line leading away from the
pitch. If they fall during the transition from climb to
traverse, they will shock load their ascender in a cross-
loaded configuration. In cases where the horizontal
line is anchored at both ends, it is better to clip in us-
ing a cowstail carabiner (with gate facing away from
the rock). If that line is on a slope, a caver can clip in
with their cowstail carabiner (to take the load) and as-
cender (to capture progress as they move upslope).
American Caving Accidents
If you are providing new cavers their first verti-
The best cave rescue is one that is never needed,

---------- Page 23 ----------
Scott McCrea NSS 40839 & Andy Armstrong NSS 45993
T
lhud! "Uggh." I heard it above me in Cyclops
Cave-the sound of coverall-covered flesh
smacking limestone. Fortunately, the caver
had fallen backward, wedging himself across the top
of the canyon. He had a death grip on his rack, which
was still rigged to the rope, but no longer attached to
him. For one of a number of possible reasons, he had
become detached from his descender, his only point
of connection with the rope.
Stories like this are not uncommon in ACA re-
ports. Though not frequent, this type of accident is
a recurring theme throughout the years of ACA sta-
tistics. In 1991, in one of the best-known examples,
Chris Yeager fell 23 meters to his fate in Cueva Ch-
eve in Oaxaca, Mexico. The next caver down the rope
found Yeager's rack still rigged in at a rebelay.
In both of these cases, the caver experienced a
freak occurrence of a cross-load or rollout failure.
The Cyclops caver was in the process of crossing a
simple, non-free hanging rebelay. He rigged his rack,
fiddled with the bars, and removed his cowstail from
the rebelay anchor. When he sat down on the rack,
he quickly realized it was no longer attached to him,
but by then it was too late. Somehow, in the fiddling
and reaching, his screw-lock carabiner had become
unlocked. Then, in the process of load transfer at
the rebelay, the rack eye was able to lever open the
carabiner gate. Fortunately, in this instance the cav-
er's quick reflexes and the geometry of the pit were
enough to save the day.
Metal rappel devices connected to metal D-links
on a harness by another piece of metal hardware
(usually a carabiner) represent a chain of three hard
links. When such a chain is subjected to cyclic load-
ing (weighting and unweighting), it can often end
up in less than ideal configurations. In the situations
described above, the carabiners became unlocked, ei-
ther in the process of cyclic loading or at some time
before the accident. When a carabiner is unlocked, a
descender can often push in on the outside of the gate
and open it, usually while unloading the descender.
If this is not discovered while it is happening, then
the descender can slip right out of the carabiner when
it is reweighted.
When a chain of three hard links gets re-weight-
ed, catastrophe can result-either from an unlocked
gate, or from complete failure of the gate by lever ac-
tion even when the carabiner is locked. This happens
when the chain gets cross-loaded or twisted during
The Rappel Test
A Test You Can't Fail
the unweighting. When the cross-loaded or twisted
chain gets loaded again, the descender (especially a
full-size rack) can exert a lever force on the carabi-
ner gate, breaking it or the locking sleeve while the
carabiner is locked. In this issue of ACA, there is a
report (on page 72) of a caver in Kentucky breaking
the screw lock sleeve on his rack carabiner and fall-
ing the last 10 feet of a 97 foot rappel.
Because of the risk of rollout failure, many cav-
ers use a screw link instead of a carabiner as their
rack connection. A 7-mm oval maillon rapide is an
especially popular choice for this connection because
its dimensions are too narrow to allow a cross-load.
These links are rated to 25 kN, which is comparable
to many carabiners used for the same purpose, and
they can be lightly wrenched shut. It is important to
note that while a small screwlink is a good solution
for a rack, it is dangerous to use a small screwlink
as a bobbin connection. Bobbins are made to be at-
tached with a large-stock carabiner, and screwlinks
can move around in the opening and actually cause
the latch to open. Other ways of preventing rollout
include using double carabiners for the rack con-
nection or using a cowstail clipped into the rack as
a backup.
However, even if you take all of the precautions
described above to protect your descender attach-
ment, there are many other ways that your descender
can fail. One of these is a backward threading of rack
bars known as a "suicide rig" or a "zipper." Other
ways to screw up when loading a descender include
but are not limited to; failing to close a bobbin, load-
ing a descender that is attached to a gear loop or belt
loop, attaching to the incorrect side of a rope rigged
for a pull-down, or even just slipping at the edge and
immediately falling into an out of control rappel.
Fortunately, there is a test that can prevent any
and all of these situations from being deadly: a rap-
pel test. A rappel test involves maintaining a second
point of attachment until the descent control device
has been "tested." The rappel test is a rappeller's pre-
flight checklist. The test proves that the rappel device
is rigged and functions properly. The test catches
many mistakes that may lead to serious accidents. By
temporarily adding a second point of attachment, a
rappel test allows us to test the integrity and opera-
tion of our descent control device, allowing it to fail
without serious consequence. Any failure of the de-
scender or its attachment will result in load transfer
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 24 ----------
to the second point of attachment, thus preventing a
vices are a quick-attach safety, or "QAS," and a cow-
fall down the pitch.
stail. A QAS is a rope grab (most commonly a handled
With repetition, the rappel test becomes an auto-
or Petzl Basic-style toothed ascender) attached to the
matic part of rappelling technique. When it becomes
harness with a tether. A QAS can double as the upper
standard operating procedure, then you can be sure
ascender of a climbing system, or it can be a separate,
that it will be there when you need it, when some-
extra ascender. This second point of attachment can
thing goes awry with gear or human judgment.
be provided almost anywhere, including mid-rope as
during a changeover. Alternately, a cowstail may be
There are five simple steps to a rappel test:
used at pitch-head anchors, rebelays, and loop knots.
Simply clip into the anchor or knot to provide the
1. Attach
second point of attachment.
2. Rig
3. Test
catch problems and mistakes with any type of descent
4. Stow
control device-rack, figure-eight, bobbin, ATC, Gri-
5. Go
Gri, ID, Scarab, Münter hitch, and SO on. This is also
a good time to triple-check harness buckles, carabi-
First, attach a safety device. This will save the
ner/screwlink locks, and carabiner/screwlink orienta-
day if any of the above-mentioned problems occur.
tions and to grab the pack and rope you left laying on
The safety device is a fail-safe that is not loaded and
that rock.
its tether should have some slack. If the slack is lost,
a step up in a footloop may be necessary to gain slack
a tiny amount of rope (1-2 cm is plenty) properly
again.
slides through the descender. Check all descender-
The two primary types of rappel test safety de-
to-harness connections. Check carabiner gates, look-
The second point of attachment in a rappel test can be provided either by a rope grab attached to the rope above the descender (left), or a cowstail
clipped into an anchor or rebelay (right). Photos by Andy and Bonny Armstrong.
American Caving Accidents
Second, rig the descender. The rappel test will
Third, load and test the descender. Verify that

---------- Page 25 ----------
ing for cross-loading or levering. Be careful to main-
tain slack in the QAS. Once proper configuration and
operation are confirmed, stop and maintain control
of the descender during step 4. A soft or hard lock of
the descender may be necessary here.
Fourth, stow the safety device (QAS or cow-
stail). Maintaining predictable gear organization in-
creases safety and efficiency. Being able to stow (and
draw) a QAS with one hand is a valuable skill and
can be accomplished with thoughtful gear organiza-
tion and practice. Ideally, any device considered a
QAS should be operable with only one hand.
Fifth and finally, unlock and rappel with cau-
tious confidence.
Rappelling is one of the only times that many
North American cavers will routinely commit to a
single point of attachment to the rope. It is prudent
that we take a little extra care to test and confirm the
integrity of our system before committing to that
single point. A rappel test should be performed ev-
ery time an unloaded descender is to be loaded. If a
descender is unloaded at a rebelay or ledge, the caver
should first complete a new rappel test before con-
tinuing.
Take the rappel test every time. Make it a habit-
even on those low-angle slopes and short drops. It's a
test that, if taken properly, is impossible to fail.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 26 ----------
Suspension Trauma Underground
Roger Mortimer, MD NSS 26529
I
n this edition of American Caving Accidents (ACA),
rescue was a young woman who fell rock climbing
we see several instances of someone getting stuck
and was suspended for four hours. She died a "few
on rope. In some cases, they required assistance to
minutes" after rescue. This was, however, in the day
continue on. We don't know the symptoms felt dur-
before seat harnesses were used. She was suspended
ing the Ellisons case (page 95), but we read that the
by a chest harness alone. Another case of an immedi-
person in Carroll Cave felt anxious and passed out
ate death after rescue was reported in ACA.³ In this
(page 67). People can safely spend hours and even
incident from 1992 in Banshee Hole in Tennessee,
days in a harness, but just minutes spent by someone
the person was suspended for four hours, then died
who can no longer move can be very dangerous.
upon rescue. He too was using a chest harness alone
Losing consciousness on rope can lead to sus-
to climb. In both cases of death upon rescue that have
pension trauma. The current understanding is that
been reported, neither was even wearing a seat har-
pooling of blood in the legs leads to lack of blood
ness. That makes it even more difficult to implicate
flow to the brain and other organs. Some people are
the harness in this problem.
skeptical of this concept. It is a rare event, SO it's hard
to make lists of cases to study. Harnesses, practices,
unexpected deaths on rope as early as 1972. Soon
and attitudes have changed over the years, making
thereafter, French cavers observed that people who
it difficult to compare cases over the long term. Un-
died on rope did it very quickly. Both groups noted
fortunately, there is no accepted definition of what
that there was not trauma to explain these deaths.
makes a case of suspension trauma.
The French initially thought that hypothermia was
The list of deadly cases is thankfully short.
to blame, since 10 of the 12 were in waterfalls, and it
There are other near misses though, some of which
likely played a large part, but it was more than that.
get publicity and probably some that do not. Classic
symptoms are those one would feel before fainting
climb up a rope then pretend to be unconscious SO
such as nausea, light-headedness, or feeling flushed.
they could see what happened. Their first two vol-
These would be accompanied by lower blood pres-
unteers became truly unconscious in 7 and 30 min-
sure, pallor, and increased heart rate followed by a
utes. They decided to try again in a more controlled
decreased heart rate.
setting with more medical back up and had someone
Some people are more at risk than others-at
pass out in 6 minutes. They concluded that this was
least for the pre-fainting symptoms felt in a lab set-
more than just hypothermia.
ting. Gender makes no difference, but increased
weight increases risk. An alpine or caving harness is
patients; that is, they cannot get enough blood into
safer than just a chest harness or waist belt. Pre-exist-
the brain. The longer someone stayed unmoving on
ing dehydration or hypothermia increase risk. Pain
rope, the more blood shifted from core circulation
may be an independent risk.
and got stuck in the legs. One can measure the legs
Because of a concern that the harness itself was
expanding while the amount of blood in the chest
blocking blood flow, the syndrome has been called
shrinks.
"harness hang syndrome" and "harness pathol-
logy." These are poor terms. The major blood vessels
in your legs instead of returning to the heart to be
in your legs run near the top of your thighs, a little
recirculated. Your heart pumps blood to all parts
closer to center. When you are sitting in a harness,
of your body, but then this blood has to return. For
this is the very area that has no compression at all by
blood physically above the heart, this is easy. Grav-
the
harness straps. Learn how to take a pulse at your
ity just pulls it back down. Your legs though are
femoral artery. Try it again the next time you are on
trickier. There is no extra heart down at your ankles
rope. It's still there. The femoral vein runs right next
to pump everything back uphill. Instead, your veins
to the artery.
have a succession of one way valves. Blood filling
If death on rope is not scary enough, there are
these veins is at low pressure. As you move, your leg
also reports of death upon rescue that have gotten a
muscles squeeze the veins and blood is pumped past
lot of press in rope circles. These have been attributed
the one-way valves eventually back to the heart.
to return of blood flow that had been blocked by the
harness. One of the cases of immediate death after
hanging passively, from hypothermia, trauma, ex-
American Caving Accidents
What's happening? European physicians noted
The French decided to ask some volunteers to
Follow up tests suggest a state of shock in these
The problem is that blood is getting trapped
The issue really is a lack of movement. Anyone

---------- Page 27 ----------
haustion, or even just pretending to be unconscious,
loses the venous pump sending blood back to the
heart. Instead, this blood pools in the legs, leaving
less blood for the heart to circulate to the kidneys, the
heart itself, and most importantly the brain.
So why would someone have problems after
hanging too long? Since blood is pooling in the legs,
it is not circulating back to the heart and lungs where
oxygen is replaced. Muscles can function without
oxygen for a remarkably long time but not forever.
Muscle cells eventually die. When they do, both
potassium and muscle en-
zymes can leak out of mus-
cle cells. In the short term,
potassium is dangerous to
the heart and in the long-
term muscle enzymes are
dangerous to the kidney. In
another 2005 case reported
in ACA, we find a man
suspended who had to be
hospitalized for mild acute
kidney failure because of
muscle enzymes.
He
was
treated in the field to pre-
vent potassium affecting
the heart.6
Normally when there
is not enough blood to cir-
culate, the body's response
is to faint. Falling down
allows a return of good
blood flow to the brain.
The body's mechanism is
to drop the heart rate and
blood pressure even more
SO that a person loses con-
sciousness and goes to
ground. In most scenarios,
this is good. But for the per-
son in a harness, on rope,
the ground is not an op-
Exhaustion, hypothermia, poorly functioning equipment, and water
tion because you are held
are all risks for suspension trauma. Photo by Chris Higgins.
upright. Instead, a brain
already starved for oxygen and nutrients is deprived
even more, with potentially catastrophic results.
In 2011 at Ellison's Cave, two people died on
rope. One rigged the Warm Up pit in the water then
descended. He did not reach bottom and indicated
he was having trouble. Communication was nearly
impossible. While waiting for outside help, another
man descended to try to help but could not and got
stuck himself. How long they were suspended is
hard to say, but the estimates are about 45 minutes
for each before all communication ceased. Autopsy
reports say they died of suspension trauma, but that
is a debatable point. The time frame is consistent with
both a suspension trauma death and hypothermia
from being in the waterfall, but certainly the hypo-
thermia put them at higher risk for an on-rope faint
given their decreasing movement.
In the March 2016 Ellison's Cave incident in this
ACA, a man made it 100 feet up Fantastic Pit, in the
water, before having to stop. This was a perfect set
up for a suspension trauma death, much like the ones
described by the French. He was exhausted and cold
and likely dehydrated. In this case though, the man's
partner was able to climb up and perform a pick off.
This may well have
saved his life. At the
2011 Ellison's incident,
the pick off (if that was
even the intent) did not
work, and a second
person died. A pick off
is something that is dif-
ficult to do unless prac-
ticed constantly. Kudos
to the 2016 partner for
doing it successfully.
One hundred feet up
Fantastic Pit, it may
have been the only op-
tion. Most of the time,
there are better ones.
In Carroll Cave,
a person ascending a
ladder felt faint and
then passed out. Given
that she was actively
climbing at the time, it
is unlikely that she suf-
fered from blood pool-
ing in her legs. How-
ever, once she fainted
but remained upright,
she was at high risk
for consequences. Cav-
ers there quickly used
a winch to pull her up
the rest of the way.
Faced with a suspension emergency, we as ver-
tical cavers need to have a plan. OSHA insists on the
worksite that there be a plan for saving someone
stuck on rope. Cavers need to be prepared as well.
In the Carroll Cave incident described in this issue
of ACA, they had a plan and implemented it quickly.
That person walked away doing well.
Of course, the first line of defense is prevention.
We need to use appropriate gear and practice the
rope work we will do underground. Preparation goes
a long way. Failing that, we need to be able to lower
someone stuck on rope while they are still well. This
only works if there is enough rope at the top of the
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 28 ----------
drop to allow this. Really, we need to be rigging with
purpose in a pinch.
any excess rope at the top where it can be useful, not
at the bottom where it can be hit by falling rocks. An-
North American Mountaineering, has been a valuable
other option is then to raise the person up. This is
resource for understanding what is happening. For
physically harder and also technically more difficult.
any rare phenomenon, we need to gather cases from
In almost all cases it is preferable to lower. Of course,
a wide variety of sources to make sense of it all. As
this only works if you have a plan on how to convert
a Society, we should be proud of this valuable work.
a fixed line to either a lower or a haul. Currently, the
When many cases were first reported, their signifi-
NCRC is teaching both techniques in its Small Party
cance may not have been immediately clear. In retro-
Assisted Rescue (SPAR) class, which is highly recom-
spect, they became important. Please keep reporting
mended to anyone leading a vertical caving trip.
any cases of trouble on rope to ACA with as much
Simpler than converting a fixed line to lower or
detail as possible. It is a service not just to cavers but
haul is to rig for lowering. Few of us have ropes that
to everyone else who uses rope.
will double Fantastic Pit but in many cases, we have
enough to leave a lot on top of a pit. By rigging with
the water. Consider rigging for a lower whenever
something releasable like a tied off Münter hitch,
you can. Certainly, keep excess rope at the top of a
we can convert to lower almost instantly. This may
drop-not at the bottom. If you think you might do
not work well in all cave settings, but it certainly can
a pickoff some day, practice- lot. Do not create a
work in training situations where the risk of a novice
second victim! If someone is stuck, get them down
having problems is much higher.
immediately. Lay them flat like you would any other
So, what do we do once we rescue someone who
first aid patient. Take off or leave the harness as fits
has been stuck on rope? An older recommendation
the situation.
was to treat this form of shock differently from others
by keeping the patient semi-upright. This was sup-
it happen to you, but be prepared for it happening to
posed to prevent blood from returning too quickly to
anyone else on your trip. Be safe!
the heart. Follow up studies of this recommendation
found
that it was baseless.8 Anyone taken down from
References:
the rope should be laid down immediately like any
1. Mortimer RB. Risks and Management of Prolonged
other patient.
Suspension in an Alpine Harness. Wilderness and En-
The same early recommendations said to leave
vironmental Medicine. 2011;22(1):77-86.
the harness on to prevent a too quick a return of blood
2. Fodisch HJ. Morphological findings in the case of
flow, but as previously discussed, a caving harness
death after hanging on a rope for four hours. Paper
does not affect blood flow. Leave it on or take it off;
presented at: 2nd International Conference of Moun-
it doesn't matter.
tain Rescue Doctors; November 18, 1972; Innsbruck,
What to do if it's you? First of all, don't let it be
Austria.
you. Practice your rope skills, don't rig in waterfalls,
3. Knutson S. American Caving Accidents, 1992. NSS
and don't let yourself get hit in the head by a loose
News. 1993;51(12,part2):366-367.
rock. And don't pretend to be unconscious on rope!
4. Bariod J, Thery B. Le Point Sur La Pathologie In-
If circumstances do lead you to be stuck but still
duite Par Le Harnais. Spelunca. 1994(55):39-42.
conscious (dehydrated, migraine, injured), there are
5. Putnam WO. American Caving Accidents, 2004-
a few things that may help. Keep moving! Pedal your
2005. NSS News. 2007;65(5, 2):23-25.
feet like you are riding a bicycle. Even better, push
6. Wharton DR, Mortimer RB. Rhabdomyloysis after
against resistance, like against your footloops if you
Prolonged Suspension in a Cave. Wilderness and En-
are using a frog system.
vironmental Medicine. 2011;22(1):52-53.
If, like the woman in Carroll Cave, you feel like
7. Armstrong B. American Caving Accidents 2011-
you might pass out, arrange yourself to be as flat as
2012. NSS News. 2013;71(8):13.
possible. This may be difficult in a narrow cave shaft.
8. Adisesh A, Robinson L, Coding A, Harris-Roberts
Studies of people in industrial harnesses have shown
J, Lee C, Porter KM. Evidence-Based Review of the
that a strap that elevates your legs prevents pre-faint-
Current Guidance on First Aid Measures for Suspen-
ing symptoms. Preventing fainting would then pre-
sion Trauma. Norwich, UK: Health and Safety Ex-
vent the consequences of fainting while suspended
ecutive; 2009.
upright. Depending on their length, the footloops
of a frog system may replicate this. Users of rope-
walkers will need to disengage foot cams then use a
supplementary strap to raise the feet. As in all things,
practice makes easier. At your next vertical practice,
see what you carry with you that would serve this
American Caving Accidents
American Caving Accidents, like Accidents in
Practice your vertical work and rig away from
Suspension trauma is thankfully rare. Don't let

---------- Page 29 ----------
Small Party Assisted Rescue
An Emerging Cave Rescue Philosophy
S
mall Party Assisted Rescue (SPAR) is a disci-
pline and a philosophy that stems from several
guiding principles. It builds from the idea that
the most important task in a cave rescue is to move
the patient to the entrance of the cave, as quickly
and as safely as possible, arriving in stable or better
condition than that in which he was found. In many
cases, the best way to accomplish these goals is for
the patient's own caving party to begin, conduct, and
in some cases, even complete the rescue with the per-
sonnel and gear that are available to them.
The concept of Small Party Assisted Rescue
was created by the National Cave Rescue Commis-
sion (NCRC) to combine into a single discipline the
ideas of "Self-Rescue" and "Small-Party Rescue."
Self-rescue refers to rescue by the affected cave team
without calling in outside resources, and small-party
rescue refers to any rescue that can be accomplished
by a small team, typically consisting of six or fewer
people. The "A" in SPAR implies that the patient is
able to assist with his own rescue. A SPAR patient
can often assist by crawling or scooting through the
cave, ascending or descending ropes, or even provid-
ing some extra help in hauling himself on some res-
cue systems.
Throughout the years, cavers have often res-
cued themselves. In many cases, self-rescue emerges
as the best way for cavers to help an injured or ill
team member. In many areas in North America, even
a callout rescue will still be a small-party response
by necessity. What has changed over the last decade
is recognition of these facts. The idea of SPAR has
gained greater acceptance from the organized rescue
community as a valid and often preferred response
to caving incidents.
As a leader in the field of cave rescue train-
ing, the NCRC has developed and begun teaching
a SPAR curriculum in a three- to five-day format.
These courses provide formalized training that cav-
ers can use to conduct SPARs with a greater level of
technical competence. These classes are currently in
high demand, and spaces often fill quickly. NCRC
SPAR courses have prerequisites of basic knowledge
in knots and single-rope technique (SRT), and stu-
dents must demonstrate proficiency in both in order
to participate. The primary audience is cavers, but
the courses have also become popular with canyoneers,
climbers, cave search-and-rescue (SAR) teams, industri-
al rope technicians, bat biologists, and mine explorers.
Andy Armstrong NSS 45993
A SPAR response is often necessary when cav-
ers are in remote locations, too far for organized cave
rescue teams to respond and be effective in a timely
manner. In many situations, because of the patient's
condition or the environmental conditions in the
cave, waiting many hours for rescue is not a realistic
option. For example, many alpine and high-latitude
caves are much too cold for cavers to survive for ex-
tended periods without specialized bivouac gear.
Even in the U.S., rescues to these caves and to remote
locations within extensive cave systems often require
a multi-hour response time- there is a rescue team
available at all.
In any caving incident, the patient's medical sit-
uation should drive the decisions as to what rescue
actions to take. This includes the decision of whether
to even attempt a SPAR. Self-rescue is only appro-
priate in specific medical circumstances, and a SPAR
response may not be appropriate when the patient
has severe injuries, is unconscious, or has a possible
NCRC instructor Gretchen Baker demonstrating a minimal gear traveling
haul. Photo by Andy Armstrong.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 30 ----------
Glen Kuehner operates a stacked counterweight system to haul Andrej Micyck over the edge of a pitch. Photo by Andy Armstrong.
spinal injury. Care must be taken to avoid "rescue
to distal extremities, such as lower legs and forearms.
fever," or any emphasis on the rescue roles or tech-
Fortunately, these types of injuries can often be evac-
niques themselves over the patient's well-being.
uated using SPAR techniques. Even a caver with two
Many medical situations lie outside the scope
injured limbs is often able to provide some assistance
of SPAR and require a carry-out litter rescue. These
and may not need to be carried out.
can include unconsciousness, spinal injuries, severe
shock, severe hypothermia, pelvic injuries, and many
ation is the greatest factor in determining what rescue
others. Litter rescue is not SPAR. Litter rescues re-
actions to take. In reality, most cave rescues are medical
quire many people and can take many hours or days.
interventions that require a technical response. During a
If a patient's medical condition requires him to be
rescue, the patient's condition can change, warranting a
carried out in a litter, cavers should be dispatched
change in response. Rescuers should consider the health
to the surface immediately to request assistance. Re-
and well-being of the patient every step of the way.
member that the "A" in SPAR stands for "assisted." If
the patient is unable to assist, then the rescue is likely
dition requires skills that can be developed through
outside the scope of SPAR.
training. Cavers should consider enhancing their
Immobilizing a patient in a litter can harm them.
medical training by taking a Wilderness First Aid
Litter transport can lead to suspension trauma, hy-
(WFA), Wilderness First Responder (WFR), or Wilder-
pothermia, and physical injuries. It also increases the
ness Emergency Medical Technician (WEMT) course.
risk of rescuer injury, complicates vertical problems,
These courses provide intensive training on medical
requires more gear, takes more time, and causes
treatments in austere environments. Medical "wil-
more damage to the cave environment. Considering
derness" is often defined as being two or more hours
all these factors, there must be a legitimate medical
from the hospital. When underground and surface
justification for the decision to immobilize and carry
travel times are combined, it becomes apparent that
a patient out in a litter.
most caving takes place within medical wilderness.
According to American Caving Accidents (ACA)
Only when wilderness medicine philosophy is mar-
statistics, the most common mechanism for caver in-
ried with SPAR philosophy can we expect good out-
jury is falling. The most common caving injuries are
comes for patients in SPAR responses.
American Caving Accidents
As already mentioned, a patient's medical situ-
The ability to accurately assess the patient's con-

---------- Page 31 ----------
Critical thinking is vital to the SPAR mindset.
Caver-rescuers must be situationally aware and think
critically about their situation, carefully weighing
each variable. These variables include patient condi-
tion, team condition, distance to the entrance, avail-
able gear, and the physical obstacles between the in-
jured party and the cave entrance. Cavers conducting
a SPAR must continually monitor each variable and
adapt to changing conditions as the rescue evolves.
SPAR is not mutually exclusive with callout
rescue. There can be a hybrid response somewhere
between the two. In many cases, a rescue can begin
as a SPAR response until responders arrive. Cavers
can be dispatched to the surface to call for resources
immediately after the injury or at any point later in
the evacuation. Sometimes, even if the caving party
is unable to deliver the patient all the way to the sur-
face, they can at least move the patient a considerable
distance toward that goal. Any amount of distance
covered by a SPAR response will make the evacua-
tion that much easier for responders when they ar-
rive.
With SPAR, the overriding philosophy is more
important than the actual techniques. While much of
a SPAR response will be non-technical, it is the tech-
nical vertical problems that require the most train-
ing and practice. For a technique to be considered
appropriate, it must be operable by a small team of
rescuers. Ideally, SPAR vertical rescue techniques
should be operable by a single rescuer. Some haul-
ing and lowering techniques that meet these criteria
are counterweighted hauls, in-line traveling hauls,
Münter hitch lowers, releasable redirects, conver-
sion of a loaded line to lower, movement of a patient
through rebelays, and pickoffs. The current NCRC
SPAR curriculum focuses on these systems and chal-
lenges cavers to accomplish all of them in realistic
situations with their own minimal gear.
Out of necessity, SPAR rescue systems are built
with an absolute minimum of gear. SPAR systems use
whatever gear is available to the caving party, which
is often a meager cache made up of small rescue pul-
leys and prusiks, components of personal SRT sys-
items, and whatever can be scavenged from rigging
that exists in the cave. Techniques that require spe-
cialized gear not normally carried by cavers will be
unavailable as options in most real incidents. SPAR
philosophy encourages cavers to think preventively
as rescuers to make SPAR responses possible, reason-
ably safe, and reasonably efficient. This mindset re-
quires cavers to plan and prepare for rescue not only
mentally, but also with adjustments to their vertical
systems and to what they consider standard safety
gear to be carried on every trip.
The current NCRC SPAR curriculum challenges
cavers to build safe, effective rescue systems with
only their SRT gear plus three extra carabiners, one
Students operating a rappelling counterweight haul system during a
SPAR class in Nevada. Photo by Bonny Armstrong.
rope grab device, and one pulley. If each member of
even a two- or three-person caving party carries a res-
cue kit like this, the possibilities really start to open
up for what can be built and operated underground.
Rope, webbing, and hardware that could potentially
be used in a rescue can be conserved by following
a minimalist rigging mindset from the outset of the
caving trip. For example, gear used in rigging one lo-
cation is not available for use somewhere else in the
cave when an emergency occurs. The rescue-ready
SPAR philosophy encourages rope-only anchors
where appropriate instead of needlessly using web-
bing and hardware. A carabiner that seems superflu-
ous while rigging an entrance pit could be worth its
weight in gold deeper into the cave when an accident
happens.
By using concepts from traditional cave rescue
pared down to their essentials, in tandem with a wil-
derness medicine mindset, cavers can often effect a
successful cave rescue on their own. In any cave res-
cue, we must remember that the rest of the patient's
life lies on the other side of the cave entrance. Our
ultimate goal is to get the patient out of the cave
as quickly and safely as possible. In many caving
incidents, a SPAR response will be the best way to
achieve this outcome.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 32 ----------
Using Contingency Rigging to be a Safer Caver
Gretchen Baker NSS 50323
"I
can't go any higher," said Sue.* She had as-
into the pit? Extra rope wouldn't do any good down
cended about 15 feet and had only 5 feet to
there. In fact, it might get dirty or have rocks fall on it
go to reach the top of the drop.
and damage it. Why not leave extra rope at the top of
"Take a rest, and then try again," I replied. This
the drop? That way, if someone had trouble, it would
was Sue's second time ascending. The first time had
be easy to rig up a haul system and help them out.
been in a tree in my yard. She had done fine then, SO
Or, if there was enough rope, rappel down to them
I attributed this pause to nerves and her first edge
on the second strand and assist.
problem. She had just rappelled this drop without
any problems and had wanted to climb back up SO
contingency rigging. But with a little change on how
she could get in more rappelling practice.
you tie off, you can get someone having trouble on
After a minute, Sue asked, with a hint of panic in
rope down even faster. My favorite way to do that is
her voice, "You can get me down, right? Because I'm
to tie a Münter hitch and then lock it off. Some people
not going to be able to go up anymore." She looked
do this with a Münter mule, others with a Münter
very worn out and uncomfortable. have a medical
and then a half hitch followed by an overhand, some
condition I'll tell you about when I get down."
with two half hitches. Any of these ways locks off the
"Yes, I can get you down." I had talked many
Münter SO it can't move. It's a solid rope to rappel
people up and down drops, but I had a sense she was
and climb on. However, if someone has trouble on
not going to move anymore on her own. I took a big
rope, like a new climber, someone with a medical
breath, scampered to the top of the climb, and then
condition, or a caver having difficulty in a waterfall,
released the contingency rigging I had used to an-
the Münter can be unlocked, and the person can be
chor the rope. Sue was back down on the ground in a
lowered to the ground quickly.
matter of seconds. I rerigged the rope and rappelled
down to her to make sure she was okay.
contingency rigging by putting just the amount of
Sue was lying on the ground, color coming back
rope you need into the pit (with a knot on the end!),
into her face. After a couple minutes, her breathing
then wrapping the middle of the rope around the tree
was nearly normal. "I have POTS," she said. Sue ex-
several times and clipping into a figure eight on a
plained that POTS stands for Postural Orthostatic
bight. If someone has trouble, you simply unclip the
Tachycardia Syndrome. This syndrome meant that
carabiner, unwind the rope until the friction is right,
when she changes her position, she sometimes faints,
and then lower them using the extra rope you have
basically due to blood pooling in her extremities. Sue
on top. Using a rack or figure eight that is rigged and
had been on some medication but stopped it recently
tied off is another way to do contingency rigging.
because it was making her blood pressure too high.
Sue hadn't told me about this potentially dan-
only one person to get the stuck person to a safer
gerous condition when she had asked me to teach
place. It doesn't take any extra gear (caveat: you will
her rappelling. It was only through years of rescue
need to use a large carabiner to tie the Münter, since
training and some canyoneering that I was even in
small carabiners may lock up the Münter). It's a clas-
the habit of using contingency rigging.
sic example of using your head and training to make
When I first started vertical caving, I most often
a situation better.
rigged by tying a figure eight on a bight at the end
of the rope, connecting it to my wrap-three-pull-two
that if she had been stuck on rope and I couldn't get
webbing anchor around a tree, and tossing the rope
her off rope and she went unconscious, she could have
into the pit (always with a knot at the end!). Some-
died within five minutes due to suspension trauma.
times I would use a high-strength tie-off (tensionless
Recent publications on this (e.g., Mortimer 2011, and
anchor), again tying a figure eight on a bight at the
Mortimer this issue page 22) show how time is of the
end of the rope, then wrapping it a few times around
essence to get people off rope when they aren't able
a tree and connecting it with a carabiner. The rest of
to help themselves.
the rope went down the drop. These ways worked
fine most of the time. But over time I learned some
which included not only caving but also rock climb-
other methods of rigging. Why put all the rope down
ing, she must tell the people she was with of her con-
American Caving Accidents
Leaving extra rope at the top of the pitch is partly
You can also make a high-strength tie-off into
Using contingency rigging means that you need
Back to the situation at hand. I explained to Sue
I told Sue that if she wanted to be on rope again,

---------- Page 33 ----------
dition beforehand SO they could plan appropriately.
If they didn't have the knowledge or resources to get
her off rope within minutes in the event that she be-
came unconscious, then she shouldn't go with them.
Fortunately, Sue made a full recovery from this inci-
dent. She is still interested in caving.
A little more research on POTS shows that this
syndrome may not be as rare as first thought. Sta-
tistics estimate that between one and three million
Americans may have it. The current diagnostic crite-
rion is an increase in heart rate of 30 beats per min-
ute or more within the first ten minutes of standing.
Symptoms can include a decrease in blood pressure
when standing, fatigue, headaches, nausea, and even
chest pain. POTS is most often seen in women from
age 15 to 50, but it can affect anyone. Learn more
here: www.dysautonomiainternational.org.
Next time you rig a pit, cliff, training site, or any-
thing else where someone will be on rope, consider
how you could get a stuck person off rope quickly.
Playing the "what if" game in your mind will help
you to be better prepared if an emergency occurs.
That's where contingency rigging comes in. If you
plan for an emergency when you rig your ropes, and
then someone has a problem on rope, then you don't
even need extra gear to make the situation better, as
you've already set up your rope in anticipation of an
emergency.
* not her real name
Reference:
Mortimer, R.B. 2011. Risks and management of pro-
longed suspension in an alpine harness. Wilderness
Medicine 22(1): 77-86.
A Münter hitch is an example of contingency rigging that can be used as
a lowering device in case of an emergency. Here it is shown tied off with
a mule and an overhand knot. Photos by Andy and Bonny Armstrong.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 34 ----------
Cave Rescue North of the 49th
The Canadian Experience and Results
Christian Stenner NSS 61663
W
ith caves spread across the vast Canadian
of members trained in cave rescue who can provide
north and caving clubs and societies in al-
rescue response in Eastern Canada. Both groups com-
most all of our provinces, caving has be-
prise volunteers who fit within a national framework
come a unique and popular pastime for thousands of
for search and rescue.
Canadians. Caves are concentrated in certain areas,
however, and it is these that have the largest con-
The Framework
centrations of active cavers and where cave-rescue
capabilities have evolved. This article will focus on
bility amongst federal and provincial/territorial gov-
organized cave rescue in Canada with a focus on the
ernments in collaboration with municipalities, vol-
West (Alberta/British Columbia Cave Rescue Service)
unteers, the private sector and other partners. This
and the East (Société québécoise de spéléologie). The
wide-ranging list of authorities and partners, com-
Alberta/British Columbia Cave Rescue Service (ABC-
bined with Canada's expansive geography, diverse
CRS) coordinates cave rescue training and response
topography, and contrasting climates, make elements
in Alberta and British Columbia through two paral-
such as cooperation and collaboration essential to the
lel organizations formally recognized as search-and-
successful provision of SAR services.
rescue (SAR) groups in their respective provinces.
In Quebec, the provincial caving society, the Société
dent in Canada is a Provincial/Territorial responsi-
québécoise de spéléologie (SQS) maintains a group
bility-generally delegated to the police service of
jurisdiction, or with Parks Canada within national
parks. Although SAR volunteers are not directly ac-
countable for the provision of SAR services, they are
delegated responsibility in certain situations. Volun-
teer SAR teams provide operational SAR response
capabilities to primary operational authorities (task-
ing agencies).
The History
(BCSF) was incorporated in 1978. In 1984, recogniz-
ing the need for organized cavers to reduce risks and
develop a self-rescue capability, members of the BC
caving community informally established BC Cave
Rescue (BCCR) as a training and cave rescue response
service. Phil Whitfield, NSS 12901 RL,FF was instru-
mental in the creation of organized cave rescue here
and served as the Cave Rescue Coordinator in British
Columbia for many years since its formation.
mys, in 1991 and the subsequent recovery operation,
BCCR was recognized as an instrumental component
in the rescue framework. In 1992, a Memorandum
of Understanding signed by BCCR, the Provincial
Emergency Program, the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police and the BC Ambulance Service recognized
BCCR as the lead organization for cave rescue in the
province. Since that time, BCCR has operated as a
Moving a patient in a vertical crevice in Maligne Cave, Jasper, Alberta.
formally recognized search-and-rescue group under
Photo by Greg Horne.
the BC Provincial Emergency Program.
American Caving Accidents
Canadian SAR services are a shared responsi-
The primary authority for a ground SAR inci-
The British Columbia Speleological Federation
After a fatality in Canada's deepest cave, Arcto-
Across the border to the east, in Alberta, the

---------- Page 35 ----------
provincial caving society of the time didn't want re-
sponsibility for rescue services. This was unlike the
model in BC and in Quebec where the rescue service
was a subcomponent of the organized caving federa-
tion. As such, the Alberta Cave Rescue Organization
(ACRO) was formed separately in 2001 by cavers and
members of Alberta SAR groups.
ACRO and BCCR have become closely associ-
ated, more formally since 2007, and adopting a com-
mon logo and using the name Alberta/British Co-
lumbia Cave Rescue Service (ABCCRS) in 2011. The
relationship was further solidified during exercise
"Dark Squeeze," a massive interprovincial cave-res-
cue exercise at Gargantua cave, under the Alberta/BC
border. A memorandum of understanding (MOU)
between the societies was signed to formally share a
common membership list, logo, public name (ABC-
CRS), and policies and procedures.
The combined group is capable of responding to
cave rescue emergencies anywhere in Western Cana-
da, and could even be a resource to the Northwestern
United States and Alaska. My counterpart in British
Columbia, Doug Munroe, has used the phrase "Cave
rescue is by cavers, for everyone," to describe our
service, reflecting the organized caving community's
commitment to the public, which includes all who
venture into caves to explore.
Separated by 3,500 kilometers to the least, our
friends in the Société québécoise de spéléologie had
been evolving their own caving society and rescue
capability. The SQS formed in 1970 and soon after
formed L'École québécoise de spéléologie (The Que-
bec School of Speleology). The school began instruct-
ing in technical caving topics, including rescue, and
provides a core group of trained cave rescuers within
the SQS that can respond to caving emergencies in
Quebec and Eastern Canada. Indeed the skills taught
have also proved valuable in providing self-rescue
capabilities to the SQS expeditions in Central and
South America.
Training
In 1987, BCCR offered a week-long training
seminar in cave rescue organization and techniques,
similar to the NCRC seminars. The seminar, 80 hours
in length, is now offered biennially. In 1995, BCCR
began to offer annual training workshops in accident
prevention and small-party self-rescue techniques,
and since 2007, consecutive Companion Rescue and
Rescue Response Workshops have been delivered
over two weekends each spring in both BC and Al-
berta. Since ABCCRS training began, over 800 indi-
viduals have participated, and, almost all of the most
active cavers in the area and over half of all the indi-
viduals within the area's caving societies have been
exposed to accident prevention and rescue prepared-
ness training. Training to members in Incident Com-
Patient movement during exercise "Dark Squeeze" in Gargantua Cave
Alberta. More than 100 people participated. Photo by Corey Hochachka
Trogphoto.com.
mand System 100 is offered online to members for
free and government grant funding provides train-
ing in the ICS 200-400 levels including training the
trainer courses.
The SQS operates its own training and rescue
division through the Quebec School of Speleology
Through various two-day courses SQS members car
receive training in basic SRT, rigging and advanced
SRT, pickoffs, and rescue response. The training sys
tem is progressive and requires the basic courses
(V1A, V1B, and V2) as prerequisites for the V3A res-
cue training.
As alpine caving techniques used in Canadian
cave exploration have moved toward a more Euro-
pean style of rigging, using thinner ropes and with
more reliance on rebelays and deviations, SO have ou
rescue techniques. In recent years we have shifted to
include the European methods such as those present-
ed in the Cave Rescuer's Manual published by the Spé-
léo Secours Français (SSF). An increased emphasis
on counterweight techniques and the incorporation
of bobbin-style descenders and cammed ascenders
into rescue raising/lowering systems has been a big
shift for us. A benefit we see is that using items in
rescue systems such as the Petzl STOP and cammed
ascenders that northern cavers are already familiar
with reduces training time and increases proficiency
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 36 ----------
in creating rope rescue systems underground. The
Engagement
SQS cave rescuers had been using those techniques
throughout their existence, owing to close ties with
of presentations to the SAR community on the chal-
the European caving community.
lenges and complexity of cave rescue, along with
how we are organized and trained. This is necessary
Operations
as we operate SO much differently from the regular
Thankfully, rescue responses in Canada have
volunteer ground SAR teams, which have differ-
been infrequent. Tracking our incident history sepa-
ent standards and operating procedures. This has
rately from American Caving Accidents to account for
included presentations at our National SAR confer-
incidents in Western Canada only, we can find 71
ence, SARScene, regional conferences, and at the
incidents of rescue response or small-party rescue,
Banff Wilderness Care Conference.
of which 24 required an organized rescue response.
Though, with much caving happening outside of the
a social media communications strategy. Through
organized caving community, statistics on injury are
our Facebook and Twitter accounts we post infor-
likely under reported as they are in any other juris-
mation of interest to stakeholders and information
diction. Rockfall is the incident type of highest fre-
on our own activities. It has been interesting to see
quency, which may be a result of the loose nature of
the difference in demographics in our followers on
some of our alpine caves.
the two platforms, and we have different content on
each as a result. Our Facebook followers tend to be
Type
No. of Incidents
members of our teams, interested individuals and
Caver Fall
members of other SAR groups. Whereas our Twitter
followers tend to be the official accounts of other SAR
Trapped/Stranded
Difficulty on Rope
and caving groups, media organizations, emergency
Rockfall
management related organizations and companies,
Lost
rather than individuals.
Flooding
Hypothermia
Sustainability
Illness
Dislocation/Joint Injury
many volunteer agencies is sustainability, especial-
Exhaustion
ly when it relates to funding. The Alberta/BC Cave
Drowning
Rescue Service is funded almost entirely by the rec-
Stuck
reational caving community in the form of training
Bad Air
registration fees, donations from individual cavers,
Equipment
and contributions from the BCSF Glenn Peppard/
Other (overdue)
Rick Blak Memorial Fund and the VICEG Rennie/
Total
Clark Memorial Fund.
Result
No. of Incidents
and funding training courses for members SO they
Fatality
are not paying out of their own pockets is the main
Injury & Response
funding requirement. Charging a small fee for res-
Response, no injury
cue training workshops has allowed those events to
Injury & Companion rescue
be break even or slightly better, and the occasional
Companion rescue, no injury
corporate donation allows the sporadic purchase of a
No consequence
new or replacement equipment item.
Total
equipment cache on central Vancouver Island, BC,
and Calgary, AB, with satellite equipment caches at
In order to organize our information and in-
Kamloops, Prince George, and Crowsnest Pass. Pre-
cidents, the Alberta Government has provided the
packed rigging kits and rope kits, along with initial
software platform D4H Technologies free of charge
response team kits, are available along with various
to all of the provincial volunteer teams. With it we
models of stretchers. Recently we are transitioning to
can track incidents, training events, member infor-
the Petzl NEST cave rescue stretcher, already in use
mation and qualifications, our equipment, and more.
by the SQS.
The platform is web based and SO can be accessed
remotely, and through an integration with Twilio it
frequency cave radios (185 kHz/35 kHz) capable of
also allows us to do mass notification to our callout
intercommunicating through several hundred me-
list via SMS, phone, and e-mail.
ters of limestone. They can be used for underground
American Caving Accidents
Recently we have been doing more in the way
A big factor in getting our message out has been
One of the greatest challenges for us and indeed
Maintaining caches of specialized equipment
ABCCRS maintains an extensive cave rescue
Each province has a set of two Drummond low-

---------- Page 37 ----------
to underground or underground to surface com-
munications or to establish precise surface locations
above underground sites in a rescue situation. An
additional radio packaged for diving underwater
through sumps is available.
Conclusion
Maintaining a capability for cave rescue in Can-
ada is a challenge due to the vast territory, dispersed
resources, and scattered people. But, we have a sys-
tem that has proven itself in the callouts we have SO
far been required to undertake. Key to the success has
been to integrate rescue responsibilities and training
within the caving community. With that, rescue and
risk management considerations are likely to be at
the forefront of cavers' minds, thus helping influ-
ence people to make good decisions underground.
Though, more people are taking to the outdoors and
to the underground. With that we hope the infrequent
nature of cave rescues is maintained in the future and
the need for our services continues to be limited.
Teams practice transitioning a patient between counterweight raise and lower systems, and a tyrolean traverse during an 80-hour seminar, Gold
River, British Columbia. Photo by Christian Stenner.
Current information and details of scheduled
training events can be found at http://www.cancaver.
ca/bccr and at http://www.speleo.qc.ca/
References:
Public Safety Canada, SAR Transition Team, October
2016.
Modernizing Canada's Search and Rescue Gover-
nance and Policy Framework: Discussion Paper. Ot-


********** tawa, ON: Public Safety Canada.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 38 ----------
PTSD and Cave Rescue: Who Rescues the Rescuers?
Tom Wood NSS 65725
able resources for mental health.
I
will die. You will die. Everyone we know will die.
No one here gets out alive, as Doors front man
Jim Morrison warned us way back in the sixties.
sional rescuer in an urban environment can measure
In our minds, we all know this to be true. But
their patient contact time in minutes, while non-paid
in our hearts, how many of us are truly prepared to
professional cave rescuers may spend hours or even
deal with death or trauma while doing something we
days with their patients. It's hard to imagine that this
it caving or cave rescue?
doesn't play a role in how cave rescuers bond with,
I've been a caver most of my life and a mountain
empathize with, and are affected by the enormous
rescuer for the last 18 years. I do most of my rescuing
amount of time they may spend with someone who
in the mountains of Colorado with the Alpine Res-
is having the worst or last day of their life.
cue Team. I've participated in hundreds of rescues
and done more than my share of body recoveries. But
easier access to professional mental health services as
when began my career in non-paid professional res-
part of their jobs. Many states include treatment for
cue, I was told that if I couldn't handle the carnage
PTSD as a part of Workers' Compensation programs
that sometimes accompanied search and rescue, I
for their paid emergency responders, but volunteer
should do everyone a favor and just quit. "Suck it up
rescuers are not typically covered.
buttercup," was the prevailing psychological advice
that was dished out (in spades) back then.
together on a daily basis, often spending days to-
But as time went by, I saw more and more of my
gether on shift. This makes it easier for coworkers
fellow rescuers struggling to come to terms with the
to observe and track "normal" post-traumatic stress
things they did and saw while trying to help others
reactions and intervene when it appears that the re-
who were having a bad day in the mountains. Many,
actions have devolved into full-blown disorders. But
after being doled out that same crap advice I men-
non-paid professional cave rescuers are, by and large
tioned earlier, didn't feel inclined to "suck it up" and
in the U.S., volunteers who do a lot of living in be-
simply threw in the towel, walking away from the
tween cave rescues. It may be weeks or months be-
very people who could help them the most-their
tween rescues, and this can make it difficult to know
peers. And when it was my turn to struggle with
when someone is having a tough time after a difficult
the psychological aftermath of a traumatic recovery,
rescue. And when cave rescuers crawl into a cave for
I learned firsthand of my rescue team's reluctance
a rescue, the repressed memories and stifled emo-
to actively engage in "that touchy-feely, let's-all-
tions of their non-rescue lives are traveling right there
hold-hands-and-sing-Kumbaya kind of malarkey." I
with them. That thin veneer that protects us from our
learned the hard way that this attitude sprang mostly
buried anxieties on the surface is more easily cracked
from institutionalized tribal rituals ("That's what I
when we are faced with the adrenaline, fatigue, and
was told when I became a rescuer 40 years ago.") and
stress that are a part of every rescue or recovery.
ignorance ("Problem? What problem?") rather than
from any intentional meanness or disinterest. We just
is a difference between cavers who, because of an un-
didn't know any better at the time.
foreseen event, are thrust into the role of cave rescuer
I came to realize that though we had no prob-
versus the folks who crawl into a cave fully prepared
lem administering physical first aid to someone who
to execute a rescue or recovery. Many times, the ac-
became injured during a search or rescue, we were
cidental cave rescuer is bereft of the post-rescue sup-
woefully ill-equipped to render psychological first
port network afforded to the trained cave rescuer
aid to our members after a difficult search or rescue.
working under the authority having jurisdiction
(AHJ). Any time "civilian" cave rescuers are exposed
The Unique Nature of the Cave Rescue Discipline
to the carnage or stress that make up most cave res-
Though they share many similarities, there are
cues, it is difficult (or maybe impossible) to follow up
also some stark differences between non-paid profes-
with those individuals to check in on them. In these
sional cave rescuers and those who are paid profes-
situations, it's important for the AHJ to have an accu-
sional rescuers. In fact, one might even go as far as
rate accounting of the personnel involved with a res-
calling all volunteer rescuers the invisible branch of
cue or recovery and make those individuals aware of
first responders, especially when it comes to avail-
the post-rescue resources that could help them cope
American Caving Accidents
Just in terms of patient contact time, the profes-
Generally speaking, professional rescuers have
Firefighters and other paid EMS workers work
It's important to make note of the fact that there

---------- Page 39 ----------
with any post-traumatic stress reactions that might
manifest themselves in the days or weeks to follow.
Caving often forces us to conquer our fears and
push our mental and psychological envelopes if we
want to succeed. But the very same character traits
that make us good cavers and cave rescuers can also
make it difficult for us to cope with or even talk about
Post Traumatic Stress Disorders.
Our good, bad, and ugly reactions to the trauma
that we are exposed to as cave rescuers are all inter-
locking pieces of the same complex psychological
jigsaw puzzle.
Laura Demarest, a 34-year-old project caver
from Bloomfield, Indiana, has spent the last four
years trying to piece together her own complicated
jigsaw puzzle after a good friend suffered a heart at-
tack and died during a routine 2013 caving trip in
Indiana.
"We were just walking along in chest-deep wa-
ter, hauling scuba gear. We were two miles into the
cave, without a care in the world," she said. "When
I looked back and saw that Tim was face down in the
water, I thought it was just a prank. I was very con-
fused and thought maybe it was a seizure as I tried to
drag him back to a small gravel bar. We did CPR for 3
or 4 hours. No one wanted to be the one to say it was
time to stop. When we finally did, we just sat there
for hours. Awaiting rescue. With our dead friend."
As it goes with many recoveries, Demarest
remembered that her very first reaction was one
grounded in anger. "On the way out of the cave, I
wanted to grab the cave formations I saw and break
them. I had a lot of anger about the way the recovery
was handled. I did eventually get past that."
But then came the guilt. "I felt bad because I was
still here and Tim wasn't," she confided.
"I was raised to believe that until you reached
a saturation point, it wasn't okay to show emotion.
My family was never really about lying down on a
couch and talking through problems. We were raised
to pull ourselves up by our own bootstraps. But I've
found that sometimes that is just not enough."
That same stoic, blue-collar work ethic and no-
nonsense, Mid-Western upbringing that made De-
marest such a strong and driven caver also made it
difficult for her to share the feelings of worry and
dread that plagued her on subsequent caving trips.
"I became a horrible mother to the folks I
was caving with. I worried every time one of them
coughed suddenly, or even leaned back suddenly.
Anything weird that went on with someone (in a
cave), I assumed that they were going to die. It was
taking the fun out of caving for me. I'd get teary-eyed
on trips and hang out in the back SO no one would
see," she said.
Though it did help her to find out later that there
wasn't really anything that anyone on site could have
Cave rescuers often spend hours, or even days, in close contact with
those that they are rescuing or recovering. This extended contact time
can sometimes leave lasting scars when an outcome turns tragic. Photo
by Michael Patton.
done to change the outcome, it wasn't until she de-
cided to pursue cave rescue training through the
National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) that she
began to put the pieces together.
"Cave rescue training was my medicine, as
hokey as that sounds," she said. "My Level 1 NCRC
training brought up a lot of feelings. I had to sur-
render control, had to fight through it. I wanted to
become a human Swiss Army knife. It really helped
being around others who'd been through it. It was
helpful to be surrounded by my cave rescue peers."
In late 2016, that cave rescue training paid off
when Demarest and a group of six other experienced
cavers were trapped by unexpected rising waters for
36 hours during a survey trip. And while for many
cavers, a second cave trip involving a rescue might
have triggered some debilitating emotional respons-
es, it had the opposite effect on Demarest. "You have
all that shit in the bottom of your pack for years, but
you never think you'll use it. But suddenly you do
and it's worth it. My cave rescue training gave me
enough confidence to stay put. I've gotten stronger
as a result." While waiting for the water to recede,
Laura said she felt the tug of anxiety when she heard
the sound of dripping water, which sent her mind
racing back to the time she spent alone with her
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 40 ----------
Members of the Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue Squad work to free a young girl stuck in Raccoon Mountain Caverns. Photo by
Buddy Lane.
friend's body. Demarest once again credited her cave
rescue training as being the reason that she was able
wanted to see the film and described his dilemma
to maintain her composure and actively work to keep
as a no-win situation. "If I were to see the movie, I
up the morale of her fellow cavers during that second
would worry that they wouldn't portray the events
rescue.
accurately, and that would upset me. The only thing
Triggers, such as the one Demarest mentioned,
worse than seeing that would be to see it portrayed
are huge factors when one looks at the perpetuation
accurately and then have to relive the events." Based
of Post-Traumatic Stress Reactions. Smells, sounds,
on his observations after the Nutty Putty rescue,
and even movie advertisements can all force un-
Armstrong feels that he is not the only caver or rescu-
expected reactions to tragedies that we as rescuers
er struggling with the devastating aftermath of that
thought we had long since buried.
particular incident. "There are people we just don't
Just ask veteran Utah caver Andy Armstrong.
see anymore, especially the cavers who responded to
The 2016 release of the film, The Last Descent,
that rescue without any [previous] rescue training. A
which tells the story of the epic and ultimately tragic
lot of people who were tearing themselves up have
2009 Utah Nutty Putty Cave rescue attempt of John
gone away from caving or rescue. With no support
Edwards Jones, kicked the lid off a Pandora's Box
on the back end, they ended up stuck in a loop."
chock full of emotions for Armstrong.
"This Nutty Putty thing is never going away for
this post-rescue/recovery support is essential for the
me. I keep waiting for it not to be weird. You can't
folks who want to continue doing the things they
move on when it just keeps coming up," he said.
love-be that caving or cave rescue.
Armstrong thought that he had his feelings un-
der control until he saw the ad for the film on the
Hamilton County Rescue Squad and the Southeast-
back of the December 2016 issue of the NSS News.
ern Regional Coordinator for NCRC, remembers the
"When I talk about this to people who don't
first recovery he performed as a cave rescuer back in
understand the context, I worry that it might make
the early 80s. "I was not psychologically prepared,
me look angry or petty after seven years. I don't
and nobody told me what to expect," he said. "In
have any interest in seeing the movie," he said.
those days, the rescue service seemed to lose a couple
American Caving Accidents
Armstrong added that he didn't fault those who
Most mental health professionals believe that
Tim White, a lieutenant with the Chattanooga-

---------- Page 41 ----------
of members after each recovery. Back then, we were
mostly cavers who happened to do some cave rescue.
The only advice we got was, This might be hard. Now,
I feel we do a better job at training our members and
they are more mentally prepared. But we still have a
ways to go," he said.
"We also used to wait for folks to reach out for
help if they were struggling. Now we try to be proac-
tive and reach out to our members first," he added.
But just what constitutes a "normal" reaction
to a traumatic event? That can differ from person to
person, and there is no such thing as a universally ac-
cepted set of behaviors or time frame when it comes
to dealing with trauma.
Allen Padgett, cave rescue veteran and coauthor
of the vertical cavers' bible, On Rope, has developed
his own coping strategies to deal with the unhappy
endings over the decades.
"One of my coping mechanisms is to not know
or remember the subject's name. It simply becomes
another body in a zippered bag," he said.
"Another is to either call or send my father (who
was a Methodist pastor) an e-mail describing the en-
tire operation. This allows me the chance to put sub-
stance to my emotions and speak of them. My father
died over 10 years ago. After any traumatic call I still
send him an e-mail. Somehow it does not bounce
back SO I feel like he still gets them. Luckily a few
tears won't short out a keyboard."
Disassociation is a common coping mechanism
for rescuers, but one that is sometimes impossible
to attain given the nature of the call. Sometimes, we
have to get up close and personal with our subjects
and/or their families. This too can contribute to lin-
gering feelings that we'd rather not face.
Padgett knows this all too well.
"One of the worst [recoveries] was one where I
never laid a hand on the body," he said. "I was the
agency representative for the Georgia Department of
Natural Resources and it fell to me to communicate
with the family. The subject was stuck on rope in a
deep cave waterfall (Incredible Pit in Ellison's Cave),
but we had not yet retrieved the body and confirmed
death. I kept my professional face on when, over the
phone, I told the mother that her son was indeed de-
ceased. I will never forget that scream that followed.
After telling the father as well, I was able to end the
call. At that point I walked away from the command
post and said a prayer for them all, then cried my
eyes out. I walked a bit and came back to handle my
responsibilities for the rest of the rescue."
Padgett estimates that he has been on 46 recov-
eries and has avoided any lingering negative emo-
tional damage to his psyche-so far.
"But the next one may be the straw that breaks
the camel's back. No nightmares now, but I can pic-
ture in my mind's eye every one of the 46. Those im-
ages cannot be unseen."
Padgett credits a routine that he's developed
over the years as the reason he's been able to keep
the wolves of despair at bay.
"Luckily over the years I was able to decompress
after each one. I would take a 'mental health day' and
simply go for a long walk in the woods. No alcohol.
No drugs. No fatty foods. No caffeine. Just eat well,
get exercise and quality rest. Works for me," he said.
Padgett's strategy for success, though it may
not work for everyone, pointedly avoids a common
post-traumatic event coping mechanism: substance
abuse.
Cavers and rescuers often have the reputation
as being the kind of folks who work hard and play
harder. But how does the layperson differentiate be-
tween someone having a good time versus someone
who is seeking to escape the reality in which a trau-
matic experience has imprisoned them? How does
one even know if someone is using drugs or alcohol
for recreation versus alienation? Especially given the
sporadic nature of interaction that is part and parcel
of volunteer cave rescue?
In other words, how can we tell the difference
between the unfortunate (but normal) post-traumatic
reactions to tragedy and those that are the hallmarks
of a debilitating post-traumatic stress disorder?
The Difference Between a Post-Traumatic Stress
Reaction and a Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Post-traumatic stress reactions have no expira-
tion date. They may affect us for a few short hours, or
they may be with us for the rest of our lives.
Steve T. Davis, the Stewardship Chair of the
Southeastern Cave Conservancy, still deals with
some post-traumatic stress from a rescue he helped
perform several years ago.
"The Valhalla tragedy has haunted me ever
since it happened," he said.
"I rappelled down and helped with the recov-
ery. My hands are shaking and my face is full of emo-
tion even as I type this. I spent many hours in the pit
digging and moving rock to remove the two guys. I
recall clearly the smells and dealing with their body
fluids. A bad scene. One of the hardest things I did
was climb up the rope. Exhausted, having to rest too
often and think about-well everything. I have been
to Valhalla many times since then. Perhaps dozens.
I have never been back to the bottom. I have taken
many pictures hanging off the top and have done
many other pits. Just not that one. I don't need to go
back down there. Nowadays I blame it on me being
too out of shape but that's not the real reason."
Davis said that though the memories of the Val-
halla recovery can still evoke powerful reactions, they
haven't stopped him from pursuing his passion-
caving. "They're just memories I live with," he said.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 42 ----------
It's a thin line between PTS and PTSD. So thin,
some people who are exposed to traumatic situations
in fact, that it may take a mental health professional
develop PTSD while others don't," he said.
to make an accurate diagnosis.
Dr. James Bender, with Deployment Health
ment can range from intensive trauma-focused psy-
Clinical Center, had this to say about the two simi-
chotherapy and cognitive processing therapy to pre-
lar outcomes that traumatic events often beget: "It's
scribing medications like Sertraline and Paroxetine
easy to confuse post-traumatic stress (PTS) and post-
that can help manage the symptoms of PTSD.
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In addition to shar-
ing similar names, there's considerable overlap in
struggle with undiagnosed PTSD? According to Dr.
symptoms between the two conditions. Both PTS and
Sally Spencer Thomas, an expert on the topic of sui-
PTSD are associated with feeling fearful and/or ner-
cide with the Carson J. Spencer Foundation, our fire-
vous, avoiding the activity or place associated with
fighters and first responders have suicide rates that
the traumatic event, and nightmares. However, there
are about the same as military veterans returning
are significant differences in symptom intensity, du-
from combat. This startling statistic has prompted
ration, and treatment," he said.
several states to look at how they can better provide
The physiological indicators of PTS and PTSD
for the mental health of our non-paid professional
are quite similar. Both during and after a traumatic
first responders. These efforts include getting PTSD
event, your body prepares itself to meet the demands
treatment covered by Workers Compensation for all
of our instinctive fight-or-flight tendencies. We
emergency responders, and working to better edu-
breathe faster, our heart rate increases to get more
cate SAR leadership about the symptoms of PTSD.
blood moving to feed our muscles, and non-critical
But unfortunately, many states are stuck within a
bodily functions like digestion are shut down. These
rigid 48-hour time frame to report a psychological
are our primordial survival instincts, and they are
injury after a traumatic event, which unfortunately
often hard-if not impossible-to control. The cold
precludes anyone from seeking compensation for
sweats, shaky hands, nervousness and anxiety are
treatment from the cumulative effects of multiple
the by-products of these almost involuntary respons-
traumatic events that SO many first responders face.
es to dangerous or stressful situations.
If you are a glass-is-half-full kind of person, you
The Role of Humor
may draw some comfort knowing that one of the
more positive outcomes of PTS is that these instinc-
one dies any more than it ceases to be serious when
tive reactions may be warning you to behave more
someone laughs," said George Bernard Shaw.
carefully in a similar potentially dangerous situation
down the road. If you are a glass-is-half-empty kind
or laughed inappropriately during an intense rescue
of person, you might at least take some solace in the
or recovery, and many will sheepishly admit that
knowledge that these negative physiological effects
they have. This is known as gallows humor, and
of PTS are usually relatively short-lived and often di-
it is a common technique used to cope with terrifi-
minish over time.
cally tragic circumstances, both during and after the
But when days stretch to weeks, then months,
event.
then years, and these physiological responses have
progressed to the point where you are behaving
is their ability to detach and get beyond themselves.
recklessly, using alcohol or drugs to the point where
This is seen in heroism and humor," said concentra-
their use threatens your job, your relationships, and
tion camp survivor Victor Frankl.
perhaps even your sanity-then you may be expe-
riencing true PTSD. This is the time to seek profes-
Though it often can provide a pressure relief valve
sional help and get an accurate diagnosis.
for some, it can also be hurtful to others who are
"PTSD is a clinically-diagnosed condition list-
struggling to cope with a traumatic situation. There
ed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
is no guideline to reference that would tell us when
Disorders, the recognized authority on mental illness
humor is an appropriate or inappropriate coping
diagnoses. The fifth revision, released May 2013, in-
mechanism. In fact, its very inappropriateness and
cludes the latest diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic
spontaneity during the most stressful moments on
stress disorder," said Dr. Bender.
a rescue or recovery is the thing that can sometimes
"Anyone who has experienced or witnessed a
make humor such an effective tool.
situation that involves the possibility of death or seri-
ous injury, or who learns that a close family member
the way we look at PTSD and mental health on its
or friend has experienced a traumatic event, can de-
ear with its humorous (and surprisingly effective) ad
velop post-traumatic stress disorder, although most
campaign called "Man Therapy." Published in 2016,
people don't. It's still not completely understood why
the white paper entitled, Therapy for Men Who Consider
American Caving Accidents
When someone is diagnosed with PTSD, treat-
But what happens when someone continues to
"Life does not cease to be funny when some-
Ask any cave rescuer if they've cracked a joke
helps people survive awful circumstances
But humor can be a double-edged sword.
The Carson J. Spencer Foundation has turned

---------- Page 43 ----------
Sirens Driving Music: Man TherapyTM for First Respond-
ers (https://mantherapy.org/pdf/First-Responder-
White-Paper-July-2016.pdf) stressed the importance
of targeting the first responder community about
mental health education-using unconventional hu-
mor to draw them in. Given that the first responders
at highest risk for suicidal behaviors tend to be white
males of working age, "Man Therapy" targets those
individuals and challenges them to start talking can-
didly about mental health. How serious is this issue?
Very, according to the foundation's 2016 report. A
2015 Journal of Emergency Medical Services article that
surveyed 4,022 EMS professionals from all 50 states
revealed that 86% experienced what the authors call
"critical stress" (acute or cumulative stress from the
job), 37% had contemplated suicide, and 6.6% had at-
tempted suicide.
So while humor may work well to set us at ease
during stressful rescues or tease us into chatting
about our mental health, it's no joking matter that we
need to come up with a better way to help rescuers
deal with the darker side of their lifesaving work.
Untrained recreational cavers are often drafted to help in cave rescues. It's important for them to receive follow-up calls after traumatic rescues or
recoveries to ensure that they have the same post-traumatic stress resources available to them that are afforded members of organized cave rescue
teams. Photo by Michael Patton.
Decon for the Soul
Most cavers have begrudgingly accepted the
practice of decontaminating their caving gear after
each foray into the bowels of the earth SO that they
might prevent or forestall the spread of White-Nose
Syndrome (WNS). And SO it goes for cave rescuers.
If we want to keep enjoying our sport, and support
those who help us after we have a bad day under-
ground, we need to set up better post-rescue pro-
tocols to ensure that our rescuers are educated and
truly prepared to recognize and deal with PTS and
PTSD.
When it comes to combating PTS and PTSD, si-
lence is a surefire recipe for disaster. Though there
are many differing opinions on which awareness
or coping strategies are most effective, most would
agree that the first step in ANY successful program is
to get the conversation started.
While some organizations employ Critical In-
cident Stress Debrief (CISD) tactics after a traumatic
rescue or recovery, some mental health experts have
expressed concerns about the effectiveness of this
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 44 ----------
type of follow-up. Some even go as far as warning
tary looks at each and every mission and assigns it a
that a poorly executed CISD may actually do more
certain percentage of acceptable losses. But there are
harm than good. In a nutshell, a CISD is usually or-
no acceptable losses in the world of civilian rescue.
ganized and hosted by the AHJ after a particularly
All losses are unacceptable to us, and I feel that this
grisly or traumatic rescue or recovery. Typically,
may explain the inability to accept a bad outcome.
a person with training as an advocate or as a grief
We simply don't allow that possibility to enter into
counselor will lead this debrief, wherein all par-
our minds. Is it any wonder that when an outcome is
ticipants are invited to attend and contribute their
tragic, it sends shock waves through our psyche? Ev-
thoughts and feelings about the event. But often, the
ery loss is unacceptable in our world. Call them sub-
folks who need the most help will simply avoid a
jects, casualties, or victims, it doesn't matter. In the
CISD for fear of appearing "weak" in front of their
world of SAR, we don't want to lose a single soul who
peers. Also, some attendees of CISDs said that at-
needs our help. But sometimes we do, and that pos-
tending that style of debrief acted as a trigger that
sibility is something that needs to be discussed just as
set off some PTS from a completely different mission,
readily as we celebrate and discuss the "save."
but they were hesitant to mention their anxieties for
fear of derailing the CISD "process."
cave rescue. Not to say that every time we perform a
Other agencies, like my rescue team, have ad-
traumatic rescue or recovery, we need to hire a psy-
opted an approach that blends the CISD with a more
chiatrist to check in on our rescuers. But we DO need
one-on-one type of post-rescue follow up. This blend-
to educate cave rescuers about the difference between
ed approach usually includes a one-on-one phone in-
the good/normal reactions to bad outcomes and the
vitation to a small group meeting to the folks who
bad reactions to bad outcomes. If we want to remain
were directly involved in the traumatic event from a
sane and healthy while doing cave rescue, we need to
team leader who was on site. This invitation is also a
embrace the notion that death and tragedy are just as
chance to informally check in with each member to
much a part of what we do as the happy endings.
see how they are doing. When the actual meeting is
held (usually within a week following the event), only
we can shine a brighter light on our darkest moments
the folks who were directly involved can sit in on the
and better equip ourselves to help the helpers.
closed-door meeting. And what is said in that room
stays in that room. If more meetings are warranted,
or follow-up professional help is called for, hopefully
our members now understand that it is not a sign of
weakness to admit that they've been affected by the
trauma they've witnessed. Though not perfect, this
method has been successful to date (on average, my
rescue team responds to 10-20 fatalities annually, SO
we get more practice than we'd like when it comes to
this type of outreach).
When it comes to finding a strategy to help
rescuers who are staring down the PTS blues, most
mental-health experts agree that one size does not fit
all. There is no such thing as a surefire method that
works for everyone, and the worst thing we can do
is nothing.
Closing the Loop
Back in pre-9/11 America, most of us thought of
PTSD as being something that only combat veterans
dealt with. But as horrific as the events were on that
fateful September day, they threw first responders
into the national spotlight. Consequently, this led to
them being examined under the microscope when
they struggled with 9/11's aftermath. For the first
time, we realized that soldiers and saviors were simi-
larly affected by the tragedies they faced.
But there's a stark contrast in the thought pro-
cesses and methods of soldiers versus those of the
saviors. As any combat veteran will tell you, the mili-
American Caving Accidents
Like it or not, death and tragedy are a part of
By accepting this hard-to-swallow fact, perhaps
Who rescues the rescuers? We do.

---------- Page 45 ----------
An Introductory Guide to Carabiners
A Critical Component of Your Vertical System for Ensuring
W
hat is this guide and why is it necessary?
People that recreate, volunteer, or work in
a high-angle environment frequently have
little training in the nuances of carabiner form and
function because instructors perceive this informa-
tion as obvious or of little value. This has led to a pop-
ulation of recreational and professional carabiner us-
ers that know enough about carabiners to be safe on
rope, but often do not get the most out of the equip-
ment they use and own. In caving, this means that
suboptimal use of carabiners is common, sometimes
leading to accidents below ground. These accidents
are preventable with minimal training. Therefore,
the intent of this article is to help users get the most
out of their equipment, thus preventing accidents
from occurring in the first place. Presented here are
the fundamentals of carabiner selection and use. This
article can be used as a reference guide for new us-
ers and a reminder for frequent users. The intent is
to facilitate more efficient and safe rigging through
greater awareness of nuanced carabiner use.
Carabiner Anatomy
To understand the rest of this discussion, you
need to know the parts of the carabiner (Figure 1).
While the shapes, sizes, and varieties of carabiners
are many, they all have the same or similar parts.
Learn the parts of a carabiner SO you can communi-
cate with other users cogently.
Carabiner Markings and Certifications
Important information is stamped on carabiner
spines manufactured for life safety applications (Fig-
ure 2). This includes carabiner strength when loaded
along the long axis with the gate closed, when loaded
across the short axis (gate loaded), and when loaded
along the long axis and the gate is open (Figure 2,
markings in the circles). The numbers are expressed
in kilonewtons (kN), the metric unit of force. A kN
is equal to 224.81 pounds. To convert between kN
and lbs, multiply or divide by 224.8 or ~225. These
markings indicate the minimum force the carabiner
manufacturers will guarantee their product can hold
without failure in the indicated configurations. Next
to the strength markings are any national or interna-
tional certifications if the carabiner has been certified
to any (Figure 2, underlined markings). These mark-
Safety on Rope
Thomas Evans NSS 57831
ings indicate that the carabiner meets the minimum
requirements of a given standards agency. Com-
mon markings include those from ANSI (American
National Standards Institute), NFPA (National Fire
Protection Association), UIAA (International Climb-
ing and Mountaineering Federation), and CE (Con-
formité Européenne). Generally, if a carabiner has a
marking from any of these groups, the carabiner is
strong enough for life safety applications. None of
these strength ratings and certifications, however,
can inform you about carabiner strength when a car-
abiner has use wear or has experienced abnormal use
or abuse.
Carabiner Shapes
Carabiner shape alters performance. Users
should ideally use the right shaped carabiner for
particular functions. Figure 3 shows the four most
common carabiner shapes, and Table 1 explains their
strengths and weaknesses.
Generally, the size of the basket, or top bar,
controls how many items can be clipped in to the
carabiner. The wider the top bar, the more items
can be clipped in. Similarly, the shape of the top bar
controls how well items stay in place. Rounded top
bars like on HMS or Oval carabiners keep materials
more or less centered on the carabiner basket, and
not along the carabiner spine, which causes lever-
age of the top bar relative to the carabiner spine. D
and Offset D-shaped carabiners have top bars that
facilitate items slipping down the basket next to the
spine. This variation in carabiner performance based
on shape means that some carabiners are compatible
with some items and not others. A more thorough
discussion of this topic is in the next section, Concept
of Compatibility.
There are many other carabiner shapes-some
specifically designed for one function or another.
Some carabiners have a twist, SO are three dimen-
sional. Each of these carabiners is a specialty model
designed for specific functions. These unique cara-
biner shapes and designs are not explored here be-
cause there is not enough space to cover the many
variations.
Concept of Compatibility
It is vitally important that carabiners be compat-
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 46 ----------
Basket/Top Bar
Minor
Axis
Locking
Sleeve
Gate
Opening
Spine
Gate
Major
Axis
Rivet
Certification
Pin
Markings
Figure 1. Carabiner anatomy. Photos by Thomas Evans.
24t8c08 CE0082
mountaineering
D10
€0082
For
rock
climi
Figure 2. Carabiner spine markings; carabiner strength in kilonewtons when loaded along
the long axis (top figure circled on the left), gate loaded (circled in bottom figure), and
loaded along the long axis with the gate open (top figure circled on the right). Certifications
are underlined with brackets in both images. These carabiners are certified to both CE and
UIAA standards. Photos by Thomas Evans.
ible with whatever they are connected to. Compati-
bility can be thought of as the "harmonious interplay
manufacturers and certified to some standard are
of
connecting components,"2 which really means that
quality products. Note that some manufacturers in-
the two things that are connected work well together
tentionally cater to particular markets, SO they have
and thus have a lower probability of causing prob-
a reputation within those communities. For example,
lems. For example, the Petzl Fixe pulley has fixed
SMC makes many carabiners specifically for rescue
side plates and will tri-load D-shaped carabiners,
and industrial use, while Petzl and Rock Exotica both
but loads oval and HMS style carabiners in exten-
make carabiners primarily for climbing and other
sion (Figure 4b-d). Similarly, the carabiners used to
sport applications. However, if you find a carabiner
connect racks to harnesses can be incompatible with
that meets your needs exactly, is certified to a rele-
the rack frame. If loaded incorrectly, the rack frame
vant standard, and is from a manufacturer often as-
can lever open the carabiner gate, and disconnect the
sociated with another discipline, buy it! They are all
rack from the carabiner (Figure 4e,f).5 The incompat-
quality products.
American Caving Accidents
ibility of racks with some carabiners
has caused accidents, such as the May
2015 incident in Kentucky reported in
this issue. This has prompted some to
advocate the use of screw links to con-
nect racks to harnesses.³ Therefore,
while the concept of compatibility is
poorly known, it is of vital importance
to rope users, because incompatibility
problems can result in preventable fa-
talities.
Nose
Philosophy on What to Buy
Ideally, you purchase and use
the carabiners that most appropri-
ately meet your needs. Usually that
is not how we start purchasing equip-
ment. Most of us start buying gear
Rope or
before we really know what we are
Webbing
Groove
doing; we then spend decades slowly
accumulating more gear as we learn
more, gear improves, and we have
more money. For many, our initial for-
ays into gear purchasing occurs when
we are young, SO price is a large fac-
tor in our buying decisions. Purchase
the most appropriate carabiner(s) for
your intended use given your budget.
use
Alternatively, use the carabiner most
appropriate for the task at hand from
among the limited gear you have. Of-
ten that is all you can do!
For those who have expendable
cash, purchase the carabiner(s) that
UIAA
are the right tool for the job because
there is no one carabiner that is per-
fect for all rigging functions. Your
life, and the lives of others, is worth
the extra money spent on purchasing
the most appropriate carabiner(s) for
a job. Therefore, a discussion of price
is not included here. Similarly, I will
not advocate for any particular manu-
facturer or carabiner type, because all
the products produced by reputable

---------- Page 47 ----------
A
B
Figure 3. The four most common carabiner shapes; A) Oval, B) D, C) Offset D, and D) Halbmastwurfsicherung (HMS). Photos by Thomas Evans.
Carabiner Shape
Other Names
Strengths
Oval
Nearly the same strength even in differ-
ent rigging configurations; more consistent
strength when tri-loaded
Can hold more gear than a D-shaped
carabiner
Flips/rotates easily when unweighted, mini-
mal movement when weighted
Prevents load from shifting during loading
(load always stays at bottom of the carabiner)
D
Strongest of the carabiner shapes when
loaded along the spine
Lighter than ovals and HMS carabiners of
the same size
Larger gate opening than oval carabiners
Offset D
Asymmetric D
Larger gate opening than oval or D-shaped
carabiners
Can hold more equipment than a D-shaped
carabiner
Lightest carabiner for its strength and size
Narrow end holds software in place well
HMS
Münter
Can clip the most equipment of all the
Pear
carabiner shapes
Belay
Largest gate opening of the carabiner
shapes
Can clip larger items than other carabiner
shapes
Table 1. Common names for the four most common carabiner shapes, including their strengths, weaknesses, and some example uses of each.
Usually choosing a carabiner to buy is as simple
as picking your desired composition, shape, gate
type, and size. However, sometimes a few carabin-
ers are more or less equal, SO a couple of additional
rules of thumb are useful in helping to pick which
carabiner(s) to purchase.
D
Weaknesses
Common Applications
Weakest of the carabiner
Mountaineering
shapes
Racking protection
Smallest gate opening
Aid climbing
Heavier than other shapes
Harder to clip than other
carabiner varieties because of
the smaller gate opening size
Strength is dependent on
Fixed rope anchors
rigging configuration
(e.g., caving, top rope
Heavier than offset D cara-
anchors)
biners
Rescue rigging
Smaller gate opening than
Offset D and HMS carabiners
Smaller gate opening than
Quickdraws
HMS carabiners
Climbing anchors
Smaller space inside the
carabiner than an HMS
Strength is dependent on
rigging configuration
Heavier due to their larger
Belaying
size
Rappelling
Weaker than D and Offset D
Climbing anchors
carabiners
1. Smaller carabiners are often desirable due
to low weight, but they are generally harder to use,
and perform fewer functions well (less versatile). Be
aware of these limitations, SO you know what you
can and cannot do with your equipment.
2. Larger gate openings make it easier to clip
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 48 ----------
A
B
C
D
Figure 4. Examples of compatibility and incompatibility of hardware. A) A compatible carabiner and pulley, B) An incompatible carabiner and pul-
ley that torques the top bar when loaded, C, D) Compatible carabiner and pulley combinations that load carabiners along their long axis, and E, F)
Example of how a carabiner gate can be levered open by a rack if the carabiner is gate loaded. Photos by Thomas Evans.
A
B
Figure 5. Examples of correct and incorrect carabiner loading. A) Carabiners are designed to be loaded in extension along their long axis, B) Cross
loading, or gate loading a carabiner dramatically reduces its strength, C) Triaxial loading or tri-loading a carabiner, avoid this whenever possible!,
and D) If tri-loading is unavoidable, orient the carabiner with the smallest end pulled apart, this orientation will retain the most carabiner strength.
Photos by Thomas Evans.
many things into the carabiner. If you tend to clip
ner with the most appropriate properties out of the
many things into one carabiner, get carabiners with
choices available.
larger gate openings (Offset Ds, HMS).
3. Rounder bar stock and larger diameter bar
their major axis (Figure 5a), SO load carabiners par-
stock works better for applications when a rope is
allel to the long axis when possible. Cross loading
pulled over the carabiner (such as pull down rappels,
or gate loading a carabiner (Figure 5b) is when it is
top roping, and SO on). Pick carabiners made from
loaded along its narrow axis (force applied to spine
these bar stock types if you pull ropes frequently.
and gate). Carabiners are much weaker when cross
Just remember, the piece of equipment that will
loaded, SO prevent cross loading whenever possible!
protect you the most is your brain, not a piece of gear.
So yes, buy quality carabiners. But more importantly,
carabiner is pulled in three (or more) directions
know how to use them!
(Figure 5c). Because carabiners are designed to load
along their major axis, tri-loading dramatically re-
Optimal Carabiner Use
duces carabiner strength, particularly for D-shaped
Carabiners are only as strong as the brain that
and Offset D-shaped carabiners. HMS and Oval
rigged them because carabiner strength is also a
carabiners can tolerate tri-loading better, but triaxial
function of rigging geometry. Here are a few rules of
loading weakens all carabiners. If tri-loading is un-
thumb to improve your carabiner usage.
avoidable, orient the carabiner with the smaller end
1. Use the right carabiner for the job! If given
being pulled apart (Figure 5d); this is the strongest
a choice between a few carabiners, use the carabi-
configuration.67
American Caving Accidents
E
D
2. Carabiners are stronger when loaded along
3. Triaxial loading, or tri-loading, is when a

---------- Page 49 ----------
4. Carabiners are much stronger with closed gates.
After rigging, double check to make sure nothing caught
and kept the carabiner open (such as webbing).
5. Prevent gates from opening during use by
locking carabiners (if possible) or facing the carabin-
er gate away from any object that could compress the
gate. Face gates away from rock walls, the ground,
limbs, or any other object.
6. When locking screw gate carabiners, screw
them shut, then back them off a quarter turn SO they
are not impossible to unscrew when loaded. If, after
loading, a screw gate carabiner is hard or impossible
to unlock, load it again, and unscrew it a little. The
deformation caused during loading can often make it
difficult to unlock if the locking mechanism tightens
when the carabiner is deformed. If a screw gate cara-
biner is impossible to open even when loaded, using
a piece of webbing as a strap wrench may unlock the
carabiner in a pinch.
7. To keep screw-gates locked during use, ori-
ent the screw gate down SO gravity screws the lock-
ing mechanism down as the carabiner shakes when
used.
8. Generally, do not overload your carabiners.
Some people use their carabiners to pull down trees,
haul cars, lift heavy loads, and SO on. While carabin-
ers will hold (usually), they were designed to hold
only one or two person loads. So avoid overloading
carabiners if possible.
9. Avoid dropping carabiners. The available data
on dropping carabiners indicates that there is little
to no strength reduction when dropping carabiners
even long distances, though carabiners can sustain
damage to the frame, gate, and locking It
is good practice not to throw carabiners around or
drop them. However, if one falls a short distance, feel
free to use it. If one falls tens or hundreds of feet onto
a hard surface, then it should probably be retired on
principle even if no significant observable damage
occurred.
10. Avoid hardware-to-hardware connections.
When two pieces of hardware are connected, they
can twist and apply torque to carabiner gates (Figure
4e,f). Obviously, it is common practice to clip hard-
ware to hardware, particularly in caving, because
we connect our ascenders and rappel devices to our
harnesses with carabiners or screwlinks. Therefore,
hardware-to-hardware connections are not horrible,
just suboptimal, because there are greater opportu-
nities for accidental incorrect use. When connecting
hardware to hardware it is good to double check to
make sure the components are in the correct orienta-
tions (that is not gate loaded or torqueing the gates)
prior to loading, or use screwlinks, which do not
have gate loading problems. This is why many cav-
ers permanently attach their rappel device to their
harness with screwlinks, because accidents have OC-
curred when carabiner gates were incorrectly loaded
or hardware was not correctly connected to harnesses
before use. 1,3 The best orientation for a locking carabi-
ner to connect a rappel device is with the gate facing
the rappeller (so that it will not open by compression
against a sharp lip) and with the gate facing down (to
keep the gate locked).
Parting Thoughts
Being an intelligent carabiner user is the best
way to ensure your safety. No matter what you buy,
it is how you use it that keeps you safe. While it is
important to know the parts of a carabiner, and what
all the markings on them mean, it is more important
to understand the strengths and weaknesses of dif-
ferent carabiner shapes, and what they are compat-
ible with. Knowing these details will enable you to
buy the most appropriate carabiner(s) or choose the
right carabiner for the job from your existing gear. I
encourage everyone to study vertical caving gear use
and techniques, because improved equipment use
may someday prevent injury to yourself or another
caver, thus making a rescue unnecessary.
References:
1. Bussey, Bill, 1992, A Disturbing Incident: Keep
Your Rappel Rack Attached to Seat Harness While
On Rope, Nylon Highway 35: 8-9
2. Denis, Kevin, 2012, Compatibility: Your Connec-
tion, Proceedings of the International Technical Rescue
Symposium 2012
3. Ivy, Joe, 1999, Rappelling 101: Using an Open
Frame Rack, Speleo Digest 1999:372-375
4. Margolis, Jim, 2015, Should You Retire a Dropped
Carabiner
(http://www.outdoorsafetyinstitute.
com/index.php/news/single/should_you_retire_a_
dropped_carabiner/)
5. Popall, Peter, 2003, A Little Something you Should
Know About Carabiners, Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Technical Rescue Symposium 2003
6. Powick, Kolin, 2016, QC Lab: Off-Axis and Tri/
Quad-Axial Loading (http://blackdiamondequip-
ment.com/en/experience-story?cid=qc-lab-off-axis-
tri-axial-carabiner-loading)
7. Slacktivity, 2015, How the shape of a carabiner
influences its breaking load (https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=g730mHDtXaA)
8. Wallace, Garin, 2000, Is It Still OK To Use? Proceed-
ings of the International Technical Rescue Symposium
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 50 ----------
Injury Prevention in Cave Diving
Peter Buzzacott NSS 64284
A
Brief History of Cave Diving
tion to the nearest exit, is now universally used and
Modern cave diving, as we know it today,
has, no doubt, saved countless lives in cave diving.
began soon after the aqualung was invented
Indeed, the improvement in cave diving safety this
in the mid-1940s. From the outset the potential for
humble invention made cannot be overstated.
cave diving "accidents" was highlighted by Jacques
Cousteau in his bestseller The Silent World, wherein
Cave Diving Today
he described suffering from gas contamination dur-
ing record dives in the Fontaine de Vaucluse in south
tion. Each year many thousands of feet of newly sur-
France. The first American cave diving fatality using
veyed passage are being added to existing US cave
SCUBA, (self contained underwater breathing appa-
maps. Make no mistake, the "easy" stuff is long be-
ratus), occurred in the early 1950's and the "sport" of
hind us and some of the dives being made today are
scuba diving into caves gained popularity in northern
at the leading edge of human endurance. Dives to
Florida commensurate with the growth in popular-
depths of 300 feet are now more common than ever,
ity of recreational scuba diving in general. The NSS
and long, long scooter dives, with rebreathers and
Cave Diving Section (CDS) was formed in 1973, in
sometimes using underwater habitats to facilitate
part with a farsighted focus on cave conservation but
decompression, are taking divers to places no other
also in response to an escalating death rate among
human has ever been. Concurrently both the number
untrained divers in caves.
of deaths per year in U.S. caves has fallen to around
Borrowing lessons from the earliest NSS ac-
three per year, and involve between half and two-
cident analyses, in 1979 cave diving pioneer Sheck
thirds trained cave divers.
Exley published Blueprint for Survival, a series of ac-
tual cave diving fatalities that were anonymized to
The development of cave diving lights has kept pace
highlight pertinent safety issues. At around this time,
with our civilization's technological revolution, and
three rules for safe cave diving gained popularity,
modern cave diving lights rarely fail. Scooters have
they being:
longer and longer ranges and greater reliability,
Divers should not dive beyond a maximum of
and closed-circuit rebreathers have become almost
one third of their available gas before turning to
exit the cave
Every cave diver should maintain a continuous
line back to the safety of open water
The gas breathed should be appropriate for the
depth reached
Two further rules were subsequently adopted:
Every cave diver should have three sources of
light capable of lasting the whole dive
Every cave diver should be appropriately
trained
The CDS quickly took a leadership role in reduc-
ing the number of untrained and poorly equipped
divers dying in U.S. caves. The now famous "Grim
Reaper" sign warned untrained divers, including
open-water diving instructors, to stay out of flooded
caves, and these became a feature at the entrance to
the most popular caves in Florida and, eventually,
to many popular caves overseas. A system of route-
marking evolved to reduce navigational confusion,
aided by the introduction of the Wilson Line Arrow,
invented by lifelong NSS member Forrest Wilson.
Signs like this one are now common at entrances to underwater caves
This simple triangular marker, indicating the direc-
around the world. Photo by Peter Buzzacott.
American Caving Accidents
We are living in a golden age of cave explora-
Technology and training have evolved as well.

---------- Page 51 ----------
Above, Forrest Wilson, inventor of the Wilson Line Arrow, scootering to
the exit after a dive in the Devils System at Ginnie Springs, Florida, in
2017. Photo by Peter Buzzacott.
Right, the Wilson Line Arrow. Cave divers use a guideline to find their
way out of an underwater cave. They use line arrows to be sure they are
going the right direction; the arrow always points to the nearest exit.
Cave divers got the idea from the "dry" cavers that used to put arrows
on cave walls using smoke from their carbide lights. Photo courtesy of
Forrest Wilson.
To learn more about Wilson, and his cave-diving innovations, see his Lu-
minary Talk on the NSS website at www.caves.org.
common in cave diving, something I doubt the CDS
founders would quite have imagined. Thousands of
cave divers frequent the most popular caves, train-
ing is widely available and is largely standardized
between agencies. Gases once considered exotic are
now widely available, reels and other cave diving
gear is better made than ever, and is widely available.
Cave diving travel is more accessible than ever be-
fore, allowing U.S. cave divers to visit overseas caves
and international cave divers to visit U.S. caves. A
look back through recent issues of the CDS magazine
Underwater Speleology finds articles on cave diving in
Mexico, Canada, China, and other far-flung destina-
tions.
Meanwhile, conditions in Florida caves have
significantly deteriorated since the 1970s. Visibility is
substantially reduced in many caves due to heavier
agricultural use on the surface. Despite this, and de-
spite the growth in diver certifications, the growth
in more advanced diving, the growth in number of
international visitors, the increase in availability of
cave diving equipment and the exponential growth
in cave diving videos on the internet, despite all
this, the average number of fatalities each year is at
a record low. If we are to reduce this number further
then two things are certain; first, any improvements
from here on are going to be incremental (and virtu-
ally immeasurable), and, second, to have any effect
whatsoever things are going to have to continue to
change.
The Future of Cave Diving
How might the next 10 or 20 years look for cave
diving in the U.S.? Well, it seems likely that popu-
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 52 ----------
An NSS-CDS member using side-mounted tanks for a cave dive through low passages. Photo by Peter Buzzacott.
lation pressures will continue to impact water qual-
same training manual to teach the same students?
ity and cave divers have a significant role to play in
One argument made by pro-training CDS members
highlighting what is happening underground to the
is that the CDS once led the way in diver training
decision-makers who will never see the beauty that
and that we should continue to do SO. Should we
we see. If we do not mobilize to become a force in wa-
fully adopt metric for calculating gas volumes then?
ter quality protection, then it is likely visibility will
Should we require decompression training before
continue to degrade incrementally, year after year,
certifying a full cave diver? Should we reconsider the
almost unnoticeably for the newest members of the
rule-of-thirds when diving in pairs, or solo? We will
CDS but clearly apparent to long-time cave divers.
not lead the way in training if we do not continue to
This raises the question: should the CDS continue
evolve.
to invest time and resources into training cave div-
ers when cave diver training is now widely available
of death in U.S. cave divers. It appears getting lost,
through much larger and better-resourced training
running out of gas, or breathing an inappropriate gas
agencies? Or, as some argue, should the CDS aban-
remain leading causes of death. With the decompres-
don cave diver training and focus entirely on conser-
sion stress associated with modern cave diving, calls
vation issues?
to Divers Alert Network (DAN) from divers in north
The current cave diver training manual is pro-
Florida with the "bends" are nowadays not consid-
duced by another diver training agency. Most, if
ered rare. Another topic of serious concern from an
not all, cave divers will say the name of the training
injury prevention perspective are the number of old,
agency on the certification card is not as important as
out-of-shape cave divers taking medications for on-
the quality of the instructor, and many cave diving
going medical conditions, such as diabetes, hyper-
instructors already teach for more than one training
tension, and heart disease.
agency SO would it really matter if the CDS stopped
issuing certifications, if the same instructors used the
eral diving population. A DAN study found that
American Caving Accidents
Recent research identified the leading causes
Cave divers are aging steadily, as are the gen-

---------- Page 53 ----------
every four years the average age of their members
increased by one year. Over the same period they
found every four years the average age of diving
fatalities increased by two years. Indeed, looking at
the claims rates of insured divers it was clear that the
risk of death (per 10,000 member-years) increased
substantially with age. Perhaps this is an opportunity
for the CDS to take a leadership role, in promoting
health for cave diving.
Technology will no doubt continue to advance.
For example, in 2014 the first dive computer ap-
peared with in-built Near Field Communication
(NFC) technology. NFC allows the transfer of infor-
mation between a reader and a chip embedded in a
card, such as when you swipe a key-card to open the
door to your hotel room. It was predicted at the time
that the most popular flooded caves might embed
maps inside line arrows, thus allowing cave divers
to place their dive computers over an arrow and see
a map on the screen pin-pointing exactly where they
are located. This is one example of how the existing
system of route-marking and navigation might yet
be improved even further.
In terms of decompression stress, there have been
remarkable discoveries in decompression research in
recent years. However, big ships move slowly, and
science is a big ship indeed SO while recent results in
decompression science offer promise, it may be some
time before practical advances are supported, for ex-
NSS life member Lamar Hires using a Dive Rite Optima rebreather during
a dive in Cannonball Cave, Missouri. Photo by Peter Buzzacott.
ample in recommending certain foods to augment
decompression, specific pre-dive exercise patterns,
environmental preconditioning and/or inert gas op-
timization. Meanwhile, cave divers continue forging
ahead, making dives that would have sounded im-
possible not that long ago. Perhaps that is an area
the NSS-CDS could excel at? Decompression for cave
diving. The NSS-CDS led the way when rebreather
technology first gained popularity in US cave diving,
by producing rebreather cave diving materials. The
same is true for side-mounting, (where divers wear
scuba tanks on the side rather than on the back).
These are two good examples of the CDS leading the
way in injury prevention, through training.
In closing, I would like to congratulate the NSS
for producing 50 years of American Caving Accidents
(ACA). There is little point to monitoring injuries and
near-misses in an operational context such as caving
and cave-diving unless that surveillance leads to re-
duction in risk. Cave diving instructors look to ACA
for examples to share with their students, and cases
are often discussed between divers in online forums.
Over half a century, the NSS has amassed a dataset
rich in potential to continue assisting the develop-
ment of injury prevention interventions. What they
might be, and how the CDS might implement them,
remain to be seen (over the next 50 years).
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 54 ----------
Floyd Collins: His Accident Started it All
Roger W. Brucker NSS 1999
I
n 1925, Floyd Collins, a Kentucky cave explorer,
siphoned off somewhere between one-third and one-
became trapped in 155-foot-long Sand Cave near
half the revenue from Mammoth Cave for the past
Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. In the next 16 days,
three years. Couldn't Floyd leapfrog George and find
his horrifying predicament and the epic struggle by
a cave closer and intercept paying tourists?
volunteers to free him became one of the most sensa-
tional news stories between World War I and World
who owned land near the intersection of the Cave
War II.
City road and the Flint Ridge road. Any big cave
Any cave explorer should pay attention to this
there could be expected to spread beneath the farm-
story, as it informed nearly all of today's cave res-
ers' land. Such a cave would be first in line, closer to
cue protocols. Indeed, our book Trapped! The Story
town. By contract, Floyd would receive half the profit
of Floyd Collins by Robert K. Murray and Roger W.
and the three farmers would split the other half. Fur-
Brucker, Kentucky University Press, 1979, was re-
thermore, each farmer would room and board Floyd
quired reading for some rescue-
training courses because almost
everything that could go wrong
did go wrong during the 17-day
ordeal. Here are the bare-bones
facts of the accident and rescue
attempt.
Floyd, 37, had been a suc-
cessful cave explorer for many
years. In 1910 he discovered
Donkey Cave on his family farm.
This 800-foot-long trunk passage
had a crawlway near its termi-
nal breakdown that led to some
vertical shafts. He explored Salts
Cave with others. He discovered
Crystal Cave in 1918 on the farm.
It revealed fantastic gypsum dis-
plays-crystals, delicate flowers,
Floyd Collins
needles, and helictites. Crystal
Cave's tourist routes extended a
Floyd Collins in front of the Crystal Cave ticket
couple of miles. Through a tight
office around 1924. Autographed photo by
crawlway and canyons, he dis-
Wade Highbaugh, courtesy of Roger Brucker.
covered a couple of more miles
of cave. Floyd's family dug a
new entrance, cleared trails, built a ticket office, and
at
put solicitors on the roads to stop and sell tickets
tube, roughly 18-inches in diameter, but blocked by
to tourists. The cave was not the financial bonanza
breakdown.
Floyd hoped. Too many commercial caves were open
closer to town on the main road, and their road sales
he placed dynamite under the breakdown and insert-
crews easily convinced tourists to visit closer caves-
ed a very long fuse, for it would take at least ten min-
New Entrance to Mammoth Cave, Mammoth Cave,
utes to reach safety. He scrambled up the chute and
and Great Onyx Cave.
heard the distant boom as he neared the entrance. As
Floyd realized that to make money he needed a
one familiar with blasting, he knew he must allow
cave closer to Cave City. If he could leapfrog George
the fumes to clear.
Morrison, as George had done to Mammoth Cave
when he found the New Entrance to Mammoth Cave
the blast site and clear the loose rocks. The blast
closest to town, then he'd get rich. Slick George had
had opened the crawlway and he pushed his coil of
American Caving Accidents
Floyd Collins contracted with three farmers
while he hunted for the cave.
Starting around January 20,
1925, Floyd scoured the land-
scape and selected a sandstone
overhang at the head of a reen-
trant valley as a likely place for
an entrance. He saw that the back
wall of the overhang bottomed
at the contact of the Girkin lime-
stone, SO digging there might
open a passage into a cave below.
He spent two weeks excavating,
first finding a small grand piano-
shaped room three feet high. He
dug along the line of least resis-
tance between breakdown blocks,
hauling the soil out in burlap
bags. His tunnel led to another
small void. This cavity, the size
of the interior of a small pup tent
formed a turnaround room, and
formed an acute angle that dou-
bled back and down. He followed
the easy way, down a chute that
was barely man-size, descending
a
15° angle. At the bottom, he found a solid rock
He had blasted through small places before, SO
Days later he returned with a rope to check

---------- Page 55 ----------
rope and kerosene lantern ahead of him. The crawl
opened on the lip of a pit. Floyd rigged the rope as a
hand line and lowered himself to stand in the bottom
of a deep pit. He said there were several leads out,
but his lamp flickered. He'd forgotten to fill the lamp,
but no big deal, he headed back the 150-foot route
toward the entrance.
A few feet from the pit he came to where the blast
had loosened the rocks. He rolled onto his back and
pushed the lantern ahead of him vigorously-
tipped over and went out. He was in the dark, but
did not panic-he'd once spent 18 hours in the dark
in Crystal Cave groping his way out by feel alone.
He kicked with his left foot, causing a suspend-
ed rock to drop, pinning his left ankle in a V-shaped
crevice. He wiggled and pushed, but the left leg
became even more trapped. Other rocks fell, bury-
ing his feet and lower torso. Now he panicked! He
clawed with his hands for purchase until he felt pain.
Too bad he hadn't told farmer Bee Doyel exactly
when he'd be back.
It rained that Friday night and Saturday. Doyle
was used to Floyd's odd hours, SO he finally set out
early Sunday morning with partner Ed Estes and his
son, Jewell. At the entrance to Sand Cave they found
Floyd's coat hanging on a wall nubbin. His rifle was
there. Jewell Estes, the kid, was sent into the hole to
find Floyd. Jewel's yells summoned a faint cry from
Floyd. "I'm trapped Bring some tools. get my
brothers." Doyel and Ed went to the Collins farm and
alerted his father Lee and brother Marshall. One of
the most bizarre rescue attempts began.
Several facts should be noted. The site where
Floyd was trapped could be reached by only very
small men-only four or five could reach him. Sec-
ond, those few had to go down the chute head first to
reach Floyd. Feet first, they'd step on his face! Third,
only two were cavers - Floyd's brother Homer, and
Floyd's friend Johnnie Gerald had caved a few times
with Floyd. Skeets Miller, the young reporter from
the Louisville Courier-Journal had never been in any
cave.
It was hours before Homer brought food and
water to Floyd. Hypothermia was already in progress
and water dripped on Floyd's face. Well-meaning
volunteers took food into the cave, but were quickly
terrified by the tight quarters, SO they stashed the
food in the first room-then they lied about feeding
Floyd.
Skeets Miller encountered Homer outside the
cave early in the morning. The reporter quizzed the
exhausted Homer, who urged Miller to find out the
answers himself. Miller plunged in Sand Cave with
a borrowed flashlight, slid headfirst down the chute,
and landed on Floyd's face.
The problem was that working upside down
in cramped quarters was exhausting work. Floyd's
Floyd Collins at the staircase entrance to Crystal Cave in 1924.
courtesy of Stan Sides.
body plugged the tube- there were few reacl
rocks to move! The commercial manager of C1
Cave suggested strapping a harness around Fl
upper body, attaching a rope, and pulling him
Floyd agreed.
The pulling attempt had Homer first in line
Skeets Miller second. Other volunteers were sp
up the chute, through the turnaround room, and
the crawlway toward the entrance. They warned
the pulling would art-they feared breaking h
bones. Floyd responded, "Go ahead. I don't C
you pull my foot off!" On the count of three the
stiffened. Floyd's agonizing and unending SC
and pleas to stop pulling unnerved Homer, who
orously demanded they stop. Homer refused to a
another pull. It would kill his brother, he asserte
Regular feeding and diversion of the V
seemed to slow Floyd's weakening from hypoth
ia. Johnnie Gerald and Skeets Miller valiantly m
what rocks they could reach, down to his k
Meanwhile several volunteers were supposedly
larging the crawlway to the Turnaround Room
chute. Instead of passing the material out of the
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 56 ----------
they merely rearranged it. Some attempts to install
down, feed Floyd, and work to get him out. When
wooden shoring in the areas with weak ceilings were
Johnnie called the U.S. National Guard General a
feeble. The ceiling still dropped rocks on those who
"dumb son-of-a-bitch," he was forcibly ejected per-
wriggled through the cave.
manently from the site.
Skeets Miller had a bright idea: If he were given
a small screw jack and a crowbar, he might jack up
tated by the railroad ties used to brace the walls as the
the rock that held Floyd's ankle fast. He tried and
shaft descended. He set the location where a hoisting
tried. The jack placed on the ceiling over Floyd's
line could pass the drip edge of the overhang, some
head pushed down on the crowbar thrust into the
15 feet horizontally and about 55 feet vertically from
pile beyond Floyd's knees. The bar bent then sprang
Floyd's apparent location. He forbid the blasting of
sideways. Several attempts left Miller exhausted.
big rocks the diggers encountered because he feared
Floyd urged Skeets to get some sleep and return.
it would collapse everything and crush Floyd. Un-
Surely the jack would work next time.
fortunately, the drip line also conducted runoff from
the hillside above to fall directly into the deepening
shaft. Crews were organized into shifts SO workers
dug round the clock. They pounded big breakdown
rocks into gravel by sledge hammer and chisels. No
power shovels were allowed- fumes could be
sucked into the cave and kill Floyd. Water stood in
the shaft on occasion, up to three feet deep. A pump
was found and hooked up to drain it.
Floyd, as indicated by the incomplete survey. Now
the volunteers drove a horizontal tunnel 13 feet and
broke through to where Floyd's lifeless head lay. His
body was encased in gravel, apparently washed in.
A miner was sent to identify the corpse, and his gold
front tooth confirmed it was indeed Floyd. The later-
al tunnel was collapsing SO the decision was quickly
made to leave the dead man in the cave.
Workers at the top of the rescue shaft. The sling holding the worker is
attached to the hoist cable that lifted the bucket. Henry Carmichael is in
the background left. Photo courtesy of Roger Brucker.
the story goes on, and on, and on. Four months later,
Homer hired a crew of miners to recover his broth-
Alas, the ceiling of the cave beyond the turn-
er's body. They dug the shaft deeper, made a new
around room at the top of the chute collapsed. Sever-
lateral tunnel, and came into the pit behind the dead
al volunteers examined the collapse. They said it was
man. They brought out the decomposing body and
hopeless to try to dig through the collapse. A miner, a
the trapping rock. They did not explore the deep pit
self-styled expert, said a "tunnel squeeze" was bring-
Floyd found.
ing the entire cave down and would kill everyone.
Simultaneously, on the surface a civil engineer had
"When one person is trapped, in peril, or dies, that's
arrived with his crew of volunteers. They were from
tragic. When the world is about to be annihilated
KYROCK, the Kentucky Rock Asphalt Company, a
by nuclear blast, asteroid collision, or hostile aliens,
large quarry operation nearby, and Superintendent
that's entertainment." Stories like the entrapment of
Henry Carmichael took charge. Now that the profes-
Floyd Collins in 1925, the sinking of the Titanic, the
sionals were there, the incompetent bungling of the
Hindenburg dirigible disaster, and several dozen
locals could cease and the competent professionals
more notable death news stories dramatized the need
would soon free Floyd.
for competent, professional rescue teams. Undertak-
Carmichael set his crew to shoring the over-
ers used to be first responders. First aid and medical
hang, an entirely unnecessary task. He sent in a sur-
trauma teams were an outgrowth of wars. Fire fight-
vey crew just before the "tunnel squeeze" report,
ing in Louisville, Kentucky, and other big cities took
who ran a survey line from the entrance to as close
on a new rescue squad concept in 1924. Everywhere
as they could get to Floyd. They were two stations
the need for rescue changed from a viewpoint that
short, in hindsight, but Carmichael didn't know that.
well-meaning amateurs- while better than nothing
He told everyone he would sink a shaft to get Floyd
out in 30 hours, since, he said, all hope of reaching
accident or mass disaster readiness.
Floyd through the cave was gone. Johnnie Gerald
complained he could still squeeze through the break-
today all understand the difference between high-
American Caving Accidents
Carmichael's shaft was six feet square, a size dic-
Two weeks later the shaft reached the level of
These are the facts of the rescue attempt, but
As The New Yorker magazine recently observed,
were simply not up to the challenges of individual
Some experts worked their way up. Firefighters

---------- Page 57 ----------
speed fire attack capability and the "fill the basement
with water" old ways. Cave rescue capability prof-
ited by the lessons, but too slowly to save all cavers
from death even today.
Innovations and specialties, such as combin-
ing teams and techniques, spread: EMS, high-angle,
heavy lift, and underwater teams appeared. Forest
firefighting is a full-time industry. Equipment, from
expensive aerial ladders to foam suppression to tank-
er aircraft ran up the cost along with the capability.
Regular training and incident commanders short-
ened response times and improved communications
and techniques. Cross-training of modern search and
rescue skills is widespread today. Today's cave res-
cue teams are located, trained, and on call in major
U.S. cave areas. Caver personal safety is a part of ev-
ery beginning caver's ongoing orientation. While the
lessons of the Floyd Collins entrapment are applied
daily, modern rescue is taught by the combination
of all forms of emergency, disaster, catastrophe, and
preparedness safety training.
What strategic principles should all cave rescu-
ers should keep in mind? Here are a few:
1. Time is not your friend. The longer the time
between call and adequate response, the more the
risk and bad consequences escalate. Callout commu-
nications are vital, as are jurisdictional agreements.
2. Teams that train together rescue better. A
good team knows the thinking and actions of other
members. Cooperation and following the team lead-
er is a given in most teams today. In the Floyd Col-
lins accident, there were primadonnas, quarrelers,
and lone wolves. Loud-mouth know-it-alls took over
from the few competent individuals.
3. Promptly locate cavers familiar with the res-
cue cave. They already know things about the cave in
question that will take you time to learn. Call out in-
formed cavers immediately after the response team.
4. Always consider alternatives. The best plans
may need to be changed when the unanticipated hap-
pens. It is better to call out more trained teams than
risk wearing out the first responders. Hypothermia
should be prevented even in routine cave rescues, SO
extra warmth provision is prudent preparation.
5. Efficiency in cave rescue is a prudent con-
servation of energy. Manage human and supply re-
sources wisely for best results. Plan for backups and
second and third alternatives. Flooded cavers? The
flood usually recedes quickly.
These are not just my ideas. They are lessons
learned from Cave Research Foundation (CRF) prac-
tice rescues and experiences of cave-rescue teams.
I'm sure that seasoned cave-rescue workers will have
their own list of strategic and tactical imperatives.
CRF has organized dozens of caving expeditions an-
nually, with 3 to 20 parties per expedition, over a 60-
year period. It has an enviable safety record, if not a
The body of Floyd Collins after being removed from Sand Cave by W.
H. Hunt's miners from Central City, Illinois. Photo by Wade Highbaugh,
courtesy of Roger Brucker.
perfect one. Experienced cavers on hand is one factor
in safe caving, and another is continuous safety in-
struction to new cavers.
As part of the research for the book Trapped!, my
son Tom Brucker (NSS 24892 RL, LB, FE) was part
of a team that made six trips into Sand Cave to ex-
plore, survey, photograph, and thoroughly examine
it. He has more than 50 years of experience caving
in Mammoth Cave, and has his own observations on
the Floyd Collins saga:
"Hindsight is 20/20. To a modern caver, Floyd's
early tomb was spacious by crawlway standards.
The space above the rock tube had enough room
for a 6-foot-tall caver to turn around, and was wide
enough for two friendly cavers to work. Once we
learned the route, and the trick to passing over and
around a large breakdown block, we could travel the
length of Sand Cave in 15 minutes or less.
"As might be imagined, Floyd's comfort lev-
el and strength would have been improved by the
steady delivery of hot water bottles or sacks of heat-
ed gravel, delivered by modern cavers. What more
might have been done makes for interesting specu-
lation because, in the science of cave rescue, no two
incidents are ever the same.
"Had an experienced cave rescue team existed
in 1925, they might have gathered above Sand Cave
on day four. Evaluation of safety risks presented by
Sand Cave, and of Floyd himself, might have taken all
of one hour. Sand Cave was stable, fairly dry, and the
tunneled crawlway actually occupied spaces in lime-
stone breakdown. The cave exhaled 54°F air (typical
for higher entrances in winter.) Floyd was conscious
and was able to describe the captive rock.
"What is not clear today is whether more rock
could have been removed beside and below Floyd to
improve access below his knees. Miller describes ly-
ing on top of Floyd while trying to position a screw
jack. Modern cavers are quite familiar with the odd
contortions needed to lever breakdown apart. Would
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 58 ----------
SANDSTONE-LIMESTONE CONTACT
CEILING OF SHELTER
FLOOR OF SHELTER
GATE
FIRST ROOM
EXCAVATED
DRIP
Roger Brucker's profile map of Sand Cave, Kentucky. Courtesy of Roger Brucker.
five or six experienced cavers been able to place the
to begin moving rock days earlier. Floyd survived
jack, where the strong-willed Miller, with no cave
seven to ten days wearing a leather coat, soft hat, and
experience, failed? Electric hammer-drills and mi-
coveralls. Could he have survived longer with ad-
croshaving might be useful. The persistence of the
equate warming, bright light, and additional human
rescue team and quick testing of problem solving
contact? Small improvements in comfort are signifi-
ideas is a well-known characteristic of successful res-
cant contributors to successful rescue. And finally,
cue teams.
digging might have accelerated had experienced
"The next question assumes that all rock mov-
cavers been present in Sand Cave and reported ac-
ing efforts failed. How long would rescuers expect
curately on the stability of its roof and walls."
Floyd to survive in the cave? Floyd urged that he be
pulled apart, perhaps losing a limb to the entrapping
rock. Did the victim's "idea" stymie the rescue team?
Would the application of a bottle of ether have qui-
eted Floyd's pain and renewed the team's determina-
tion to pull Floyd apart?
"NCRC training teaches that the 'patient advo-
cate' has a responsibility to feed back information to
the rescue team. Homer Collins was just such an ad-
vocate. It would be highly unusual for a family mem-
ber to be a rescue participant, but in this case, did the
relationship hinder Floyd's last chance for rescue?
"Digging and drilling rescue shafts are not cur-
rently recognized cave rescue methods (yet they are
known in mine rescues; for example, the 33 Chilean
miners rescued after 40 days from 2,300 feet down by
drilling a 28-inch shaft in 2010.) Once Sand Cave was
surveyed (the survey was accurate if incomplete),
that information could have prompted a rescue team
American Caving Accidents
TOP OF SHAFT APPROXIMATELY
813 FEET ABOVE SEA LEVEL
PROFILE OF SAND CAVE


********** 15 FEET
o
M
APPROXIMATE LOCATION OF
SHAFT AND LATERAL TUNNEL
TURNAROUND
ROOM
COLLAPSE AND
9" CRACK
CHUTE
we
Rook
WIRES
LEDGE
FILL
-750
FEET ABOVE
APPROXIMATE LOCATION
SEA LEVEL
OF FLOYD COLLINS

---------- Page 59 ----------


********** Cave Better, Cave Safer: Join the NSS
T
lhe book you are holding is a review of 50 years'
of work by NSS members to unravel and ana-
lyze the "why" of cave accidents in the hope of
making caving safer for all. It is the ultimate source
of data on caving safety and underground search
and rescue.
By examining all manner of caving accidents
that have occurred over the past half-century, the ed-
itors and writers present lessons learned in the hope
that readers will benefit from the mistakes made by
others. Should you be involved in a caving accident,
we hope that the knowledge you gained by reading
this book will help to inform your decision-making
and enable you to more knowledgeably address the
situation.
There is no guarantee that even the safest,
most careful caver will not have an accident. That is
why many cavers dedicate themselves to the man-
tra, "Cavers Rescue Cavers." Through the National
Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC, http://www.ncrc.
info/), cavers learn what is necessary to become first
responders, and first responders learn what is nec-
essary to be cave rescuers. As they advance their
knowledge, many volunteer their time to train oth-
ers at NCRC events. You will find gems of wisdom
Cavers enjoy access to Tytoona Cave in the NSS's Tytoona Cave Nature Preserve, Pennsylvania. This nature preserve is one of sixteen owned by the
NSS. Photo by Dave Bunnell.
Curt Harler NSS 22735
from these experts sprinkled throughout this book.
We guarantee that you will re-read many sections as
you become more deeply involved in caving.
As a member of the NSS, or through the pur-
chase of this book, you support those who undertook
this comprehensive effort to analyze cave accidents.
If you are in a jam underground, you are far better
off having rescue-trained cavers coming to your aid
than well-intentioned responders who may never
have been underground and must first learn to cope
with a new and unfamiliar environment. The cave
is better off, too, for having experienced and trained
cavers performing a rescue or evacuation. Caves are
fragile, and cavers know and respect all cave resourc-
es as they work to find or extract a patient as quickly
and safely as possible.
If you are an NSS member, you are likely famil-
iar with the goals of the NSS and the NCRC. If you
are not an NSS member, then you may not be aware
of the many reasons for you to join the United States'
premier caving organization:
First, the NSS gives caving national clout. Lo-
cal involvement is important. If you don't care about
caves in your area, who will? Every time you venture
into a new caving region, you ride the coat-tails of
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 60 ----------
a network of cavers who are members of local NSS
in our drinking water. Cavers also help communities
chapters, also known as grottos. Those cavers work
to understand how to protect their water in karst en-
to maintain access to caves across the nation.
vironments.
NSS members support cave conservation. This
assures that pristine caves will be here for your chil-
geology, karst, hydrology, and the like. Cavers are
dren and grandchildren to explore.
the keystones to supporting and maintaining cave
NSS members receive and help to create many
research.
fascinating cave-related publications, including the
publication you hold in your hands, the monthly
nization that collaborates with private landowners,
advocating for positive, friendly relations between
others.
landowners and cavers to ensure ongoing access to
Cavers love bats when not many others do, and
caves.
bats are a necessary and important part of our eco-
system. Bats need champions! Through the NSS, cav-
sented by the best and brightest in caving with the
ers help to inform the public about bats and about
NSS Luminary Series of lectures.
white-nose syndrome (WNS) and to support bat-re-
lated research.
for cavers through interaction with government
The NSS contributes to the acquisition and con-
agencies, acting as advocates for caves, caving, and
servation of caves that all cavers can access. This
cave critters. NSS members collaborate with dedi-
includes caves like New River Cave in Virginia,
cated people at the National Park Service, Bureau of
Schoharie Cave in New York, Tytoona Cave in Penn-
Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, and state and
sylvania, Sims Sink in Alabama, Great Expectations
local agencies.
Cave in Wyoming, and a dozen others. As NSS mem-
bers, those caves are our caves.
ters," which include photography, crafts, films, mu-
NSS members promote valuable ecological ed-
sic, and more.
ucation outside the caving community. They work
to help people understand where the water in their
survey caves and produce cave maps (some of which
wells comes from and the key role that aquifers play
are true works of art).
Great Expectations (Great X) Cave in the Great Expectations Cave Nature Preserve is a favorite among cavers for large rooms like The Great
Hall and the fossil-rich Cephalopod Malt Shop. Photo by Dan Austin.
American Caving Accidents
The NSS supports scientific research on caves,
As an NSS member, you are part of an orga-
NSS members have free access to webinars pre-
The NSS and its grottos provide a unified voice
NSS programs support spelean "arts and let-
The NSS supports its caving members as they

---------- Page 61 ----------
By joining the NSS, you will have opportuni-
ties to meet and learn from other cavers. Networking
with experienced cavers is one of the best ways to
learn proper caving techniques and get started in a
great activity.
Joining the NSS affords new members a dis-
counted registration on their first NSS Convention.
Convention-goers rub shoulders with 1,000 other
cavers from around the world while experiencing an
inexpensive and fun event with great caving and free
beer.
NSS membership saves you cash on purchases
from the NSS bookstore and gives you access to the
NSS Library and Archives.
The NSS has special-interest groups focused on
photography, conservation, vertical caving, geology,
cave diving, and cartography. Each welcomes new-
comers and provides a place where you can draw
expertise from experienced people.
In addition to appreciating underground beauty,
you may discover you have a knack for cave survey
An NSS member supporting cave conservation by staying on trail and registering their visit in Wen Cave, New Mexico. Photo by Ryan Maurer.
work, organizing cave clean-ups, researching conser-
vation issues, or public advocacy. NSS membership
allows members many ways to get involved!
Today, NSS dues are less than $5 a month. There
is a reduced e-publication rate that will get you start-
ed. Believe me, the printed Members Manual and the
membership. It's a great value to both you and the
NSS. Spread your payments over 10 years, and you'll
never again have to pay NSS dues.
Remember, without your dues support, NCRC-
trained cavers may not be there to haul you out of
a cave in a professional manner. Worse, access to
caves might be severely restricted. By supporting the
NCRC and the NSS, you will be supporting two wor-
thy organizations with a shared mission to support
safety in underground environments. Reading this
book is a great start.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 63 ----------
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENT
AND INCIDENT REPORTS
2015-2016
by
Prodo

---------- Page 64 ----------
Descriptions of Incident Results and Types
A
merican Caving Accidents has served as the
if an ambulance or Life Flight was used to transport
journal of record for caving accidents in North
the patient to a medical facility.
America since 1967. The purpose of collecting
and reporting caving accidents and incidents is to
help cavers to educate themselves on the hazards of
caving based on real-life incidents. These incidents,
when reported accurately and in detail, should ulti-
Acetylene-related - Acetylene-related incidents were
mately help readers to become safer cavers by learn-
more common prior to the 1990s, when carbide
ing through others' experiences.
lamps were cavers' primary light source. Today,
Reports are collected through submissions by
bright, yet relatively inexpensive LED lights are now
cavers involved in the incident or rescue or by those
favored among the majority of American cavers. No
who otherwise have some credible knowledge of the
acetylene-related incidents have been reported since
event. Caving incidents brought to the attention of
1996.
ACA by media reports are verified for accuracy by
contacting involved parties directly when possible.
Bad Air - Hazardous atmospheres in caves may be
As with previous issues, caving reports have
due to natural processes such as biological decompo-
been divided into two categories: regular caving and
sition, ammonia from large bat-guano deposits, hy-
cave diving. These categories are further classified by
drogen sulfide from volcanic gas, and other factors.
incident result or outcome and incident type (causes
Human activities in and near caves, such as building
and contributing factors).
fires, using engines, dumping chemicals, or blasting
Some reported incidents are placed in a separate
can also diminish air quality in caves. Caves with
category called "caving-related." These include inci-
poor air circulation are more susceptible to develop-
dents in which a person needed rescuing from a cave
ing pockets of bad air, especially in low areas where
that they did not intend to enter, incidents that OC-
heavy, noxious gases displace good air. Two inci-
cur on the way to or from a cave, incidents involving
dents of bad air are reported here. A caver encoun-
animals needing rescue from a cave, or other unusual
tered high carbon dioxide levels in a volcanic steam
circumstances. Because these incidents did not occur
cave, and three Jamaican farmers died from noxious
during normal caving activities but required caving
fumes produced by a water pump being used in a
gear, cave-rescue techniques, or cavers to effect a
cave.
rescue, they are considered caving-related. Caving-
related incidents are not included in the statistics.
Caver Fall - Caver falls continue to constitute a large
proportion of caving accidents. For simplicity, any
fall by any person in a cave, regardless of their expe-
rience, is considered a caver fall. This includes the re-
DESCRIPTION OF INCIDENT RESULTS
port of a five-year-old child who fell on a self-guided
tour at Lava Beds National Monument. In this issue,
Fatalities - Fatalities from caving are relatively un-
there are 23 reports of people falling while on a cav-
common; the average is about three per year.
ing trip. All of the falls resulted in injury or a fatality,
and more than half of those persons required aid.
Injury vs. No Injury - An injury is physical damage
or harm inflicted on a person, usually by an exter-
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder - This category was
nal force. Examples include wounds, fractures, con-
added to ACA in 1994 to encompass a variety of
tusions, burns, and frostbite. Heart trouble, allergic
problems that may prevent a caver from being able
reactions, migraines, and other conditions are not
to ascend or descend a rope or ladder. Causes for dif-
considered injuries and are categorized as an illness/
ficulty on rope reported in this issue are three cavers'
medical issue incident type.
hair getting caught in a rappel device, poor climbing
technique leading to exhaustion, illness while climb-
Aid vs. No Aid - For the purposes of this publica-
ing, and one case of claustrophobia while ascending
tion, aid is considered rendered in the following cas-
an entrance shaft.
es: if one or more persons needed the help of others
outside of those in their caving party to exit the cave;
Drowning - There was one fatality by drowning in
if outside or additional assistance was requested; or
2015. The accident involved a person visiting a cave
American Caving Accidents
DESCRIPTION OF INCIDENT TYPES

---------- Page 65 ----------
in Guam that is featured in several online travel
guides.
Equipment Problem - In previous issues, this catch-
all category has included rigging, light, and rope
failures; slipping ascenders; and misuse or lack of
equipment. Seven equipment-problem incidents are
reported here. A caver was burned by his backup
light turning on in his chest pocket; a locking cara-
biner failed when it was cross-loaded; and another
cross-loaded carabiner, which was found to also be
unlocked, caused a near miss. Cavers in Montana
dropped a gear bag that was not retrievable, SO they
improvised rigging their final rappel on a through
trip. A new rope was severely abraded for unknown
reasons, and two separate caving parties had their
ropes vandalized at cave entrances.
Exhaustion - Three incidents are attributed to ex-
haustion, with the cavers needing outside assistance
or support from their team members. The caver in
the Cemetery Pit incident became exhausted due to
poor ascending technique, SO exhaustion is listed as
a secondary cause.
Flooding - Flooding caused the temporary entrap-
ment of three separate groups. The cavers in the Bin-
kley Cave System incident spent more than 24 hours
waiting for the water to recede. Flooding may have
been the initial trigger in the Cascade Cave incident,
but since most of the group made it out safely, the
two cavers who stayed behind became stranded as
the water levels continued to rise.
Hypothermia - Hypothermia is often a secondary
outcome in caving incidents, often resulting from a
caver being stuck, injured, or stranded in a cave. It is
especially dangerous not only because of the physi-
ological aspects, but because it impairs judgment,
which can lead to mistakes and other accidents. No
incidents are listed with hypothermia as the prima-
ry factor, but the patient in the Ellisons Cave inci-
dent was dangerously hypothermic when rescuers
reached him.
Illness/Medical Issue - There are three incidents of
persons becoming ill or having a medical emergency
during caving trips. Two of the patients were able to
walk out of the cave, the third was rescued from an
entrance pit. Three cave-diving fatalities are attribut-
ed to medical issues, including a diver who became
lost underwater, but found an unfamiliar entrance,
only to die of a heart attack while trying to find his
way out of the jungle.
Lost - A group of cavers attempting a pull-down
through trip in West Virginia could not find their way
through the system and needed rescuing. Less than a
month later, three college students became lost while
caving in Arkansas; they too had to sit and wait for
rescue.
Lost Control on Rappel-T incident-type category
was added in 2011 to cover incidents of persons los-
ing control while on rappel. In previous issues, these
incidents were listed under Caver Falls or Difficulty
on Rope. While most out-of-control rappels also re-
sult in a caver fall, the contributing factor or cause is
very different than those typical for caver falls. The
only reported incident in this category is from Little
Bitterroot Canyon Ice Cave.
Rockfall - Three incidents from rockfall are reported
in this issue. In two of the incidents, the moving rock
was due to cavers disturbing the rock as they moved
through the cave. Injuries ranged from bruises and
lacerations to a crushed foot and ankle.
Stuck - The only report of a stuck caver involved a
youth on a guided tour at Raccoon Mountain Cav-
erns.
Trapped or Stranded - This category describes in-
cidents in which the caver or cavers are prevented
from exiting the cave. There are eight incidents re-
ported of this type. Reasons include not being able
to cross back over a muddy ledge, waiting out high
water levels, two incidents of not having the proper
gear to ascend after rappelling or descending a rope
hand-over-hand, not being able to get back through
a tight, awkward bend in a crawlway, being trapped
by an ice fall, running out of light, and not being able
to exit due to rockfall blocking a passage.
Other - This catch-all category includes incidents
that don't quite fit in other categories. Examples in
this issue include persons overdue from a cave trip,
muscle injuries, two fatalities from an ice cave col-
lapse, and two deaths from unknown causes.
Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents - Five cave-
diving incidents from 2015 and five from 2016 were
reported. All of the incidents involved fatalities.
Note: All times in this publication are reported in
military time.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 66 ----------
CAVING ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT
STATISTICS 1967-2017
Result of Incident by Year
Result
Fatality
Injury and Aid
432364911 10655810 11 10 6 16 610 151
Aid, No Injury
55261711 6 1529139812 8 18 17 621 15 20
Injury, No Aid
61422585656556412 13 17 18 10 15 14
No Injury, No Aid
024022861684647 15 14 14 25 19 16 12
Total
Incident Type by Year
Type
Caver Fall
43426489995679 10 6 12 25 19 25
Trapped/Stranded
Difficulty on Rope
Rockfall
421014216236002 11 8710 11 177
Lost
Flooding
Hypothermia
Illness/Medical Issue
Exhaustion
Drowning
Stuck
Bad Air
Acetylene-related 0011100001003001301
Equipment Problem 013022246332324146411 15 14
Lost Control on Rappel
Other
Caving-related
Incidents
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX000
Cave Diving Incidents by Year
Result
Fatality
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Injury, No Aid
Total
40020418921435302310 9710
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 67 ----------
To submit a caving accident report, visit:
www.caves.org/pub/aca
89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 116
1465512144425263041 4 3 53 22245
89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
19 22 22 22 19 20 15 21 27 15 20 17 14 20 14 5 10 12 11 11 10 13 8 8 10 10 10
00003114651431551222 2 1 2 4 1 2 0 43
11 11 12 16 111210552423353744 31 1 1 31303
94325127453331154234 2 0 1 2 1 1 1 0 2
4221314521411061010010 01 0 10
32103301180222122001 0 1 22213
30242414112312100201010 0 1 0 12
11211221010100000000000 0 0 011
0 15 15 16 81144220032000442110 0 136
684546632323321121031 2321275
00210201152 11 294 20 9 8 4 6 3 15 9 13 11 7 44
189 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
4825686220579356 2157 2 1 5 760 56
588769722178945742584 1 5 11 82 56
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 68 ----------
REPORTED ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS FOR
2015 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
DATE
CAVE
LOCATION
January 8
unspecified marble quarry
California
February 14
Carroll Cave
Missouri
February 15
Haunted Chasm Cave
California
March 27
Skull Cave
California
April 1
Decorah Ice Cave
lowa
April 5
unspecified cave
New Mexico
April 17
Dry Creek Falls Cave
Tennessee
May 9
unspecified cave
Colorado
May 16
Kaibab Caverns
Arizona
May 17
Schoharie Cave
New York
May 23
Neffs Cave
Utah
May 26
unspecified cave
Kentucky
May 30
Neffs Cave
Utah
June 19
Jewel Cave
South Dakota
June 20
unnamed crevice cave
Ontario, Canada
June 30
Timpanogos Cave System
Utah
July 5
Stephens Gap Cave
Alabama
July 6
Big Four Ice Caves
Washington
July 25
Marbo Cave
Guam
August 15
Scapegoat Cave System
Montana
August 20
East Crater Cave
Washington
September 6
Stephens Gap Cave
Alabama
September 6
Rats Nest Cave
Alberta, Canada
September 10
Raccoon Mountain Caverns
Tennessee
October 2
Scott Hollow Cave
West Virginia
October 3
Pond Cave
Arizona
October 10
Lick Creek Cave
Montana
October 24
Fort Stanton Cave
New Mexico
November 15
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
November 21
Cherylsbad Cave
Oklahoma
November 25
Pozo de Montemayor
Nuevo León, Mexico
November 27
Pozo de Montemayor
Nuevo León, Mexico
November 28
Bisaro Anima
British Columbia, Canada
December 5
Cascade Cave
British Columbia, Canada
December 20
unspecified talus cave
New Jersey
December 27
Cemetery Pit
Georgia
2015 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
DATE
CAVE
LOCATION
January 17
Devils Eye
Florida
February 25
Sistema Camilo
Quintana Roo, Mexico
April 26
Devils Eye
Florida
April 28
Sistema Dos Ojos
Quintana Roo, Mexico
June 8
Volusia Blue Spring
Florida
2015 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
DATE
CAVE
LOCATION
January 3
unnamed cave
Kentucky
March 5
unspecified cave
Missouri
March 8
unspecified cave
Texas
June 6
ridgewalking
Oregon
American Caving Accidents
RESULT
INCIDENT TYPE
aid, no injury
illness/medical issue
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope/ladder
injury, no aid
equipment problem
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope/ladder
injury, no aid
other, ruptured tendon
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope/ladder
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
other, bear spray deployed
aid, no injury
stranded
2 fatalities, injuries
other, ice cave collapse
fatality
drowning
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
no injury, no aid
bad air
fatality
caver fall
aid, no injury
other (overdue)
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
medical issue
injury, no aid
other, muscle injury
no injury, no aid
medical issue
no injury, no aid
exhaustion
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
aid, no injury
other (overdue)
aid, no injury
stranded
injury, no aid
other, attacked by bear
no injury, no aid
exhaustion/difficulty on rope
RESULT
INCIDENT TYPE
fatality
illness
fatality
lost/heart attack
fatality
out of air
fatality
unknown/diving solo
fatality
out of air
RESULT
INCIDENT TYPE
no injury, no aid
dog rescued from cave
no injury, no aid
dog rescued from cave
injury, no aid
fell after exiting cave
aid, no injury
medical issue

---------- Page 69 ----------
REPORTED ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS FOR
2016 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
DATE
CAVE
LOCATION
January 1
Byers Cave
Georgia
January 16
Jewel Cave
South Dakota
January 16
Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
January 31
unspecified cave
Tennessee
February 6
Neffs Cave
Utah
March 18
Neversink
Alabama
March 26
Ellisons Cave
Georgia
April 17
Woman Cave
Arizona
April 25
Rats Nest Cave
Alberta, Canada
May 7
Transect 80 Cave
British Columbia, Canada
May 8
unspecified cave
Kentucky
May 10
Pettijohns Cave
Georgia
May 13
Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
May 20
Gourdneck Cave
Tennessee
May 26
Hidden River Cave
Kentucky
June 5
Red Baron Cave
Utah
June 11
Buckner Cave
Indiana
June 11
Little Bitterroot Canyon Ice Cave
Montana
July 2
Raccoon Mountain Caverns
Tennessee
July 6
Laurel Caverns
Pennsylvania
July 8
Upana Cave
British Columbia, Canada
July 9
Portage Valley ice cave
Alaska
July 12
Serendipity Pit
Tennessee
July 13
Conner Cave
Missouri
July 21
unspecified cave
Minnesota
July 29
unspecified cave
Jamaica
July 30
Simmons-Mingo Cave System
West Virginia
August 7
unspecified cave
New York
August 10
Blowing Cave
Arkansas
August 17
unspecified cave
Tennessee
September 3
Carpenter-Swago Cave System
West Virginia
September 21
Eagle Cave
New York
October 16
Lillyguard Cave
Montana
October 28
Waterfall Cave
Georgia
October 29
Twin Sinks
Utah
November 24
Bloomington Cave
Utah
December 2
Bisaro Anima
British Columbia, Canada
December 18
Binkley Cave System
Indiana
2016 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
DATE
CAVE
LOCATION
March 26
Blue Hole
New Mexico
April 3
Ginnie Springs
Florida
September 10
Orange Grove Sink
Florida
October 16
Eagles Nest
Florida
November 27
Sistema Sac Actun
Quintana Roo, Mexico
2016 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
DATE
CAVE
LOCATION
March 10
Meramec Caverns
Missouri
July 8
unspecified sea cave
California
July 26
unspecified cave
North Carolina
July 29
unspecified cave
Idaho
RESULT
INCIDENT TYPE
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
rockfall
injury and aid
stranded
injury and aid
other, dislocated shoulder
aid, no injury
stranded
injury and aid
difficulty on rope
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
trapped
injury, no aid
rockfall
fatality
unknown
injury, no aid
caver fall (3)
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
flooding
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
lost control on rappel
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
trapped
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
aid, no injury
flooding
injury and aid
stranded


********** 3 fatalities
bad air
no injury, no aid
stranded
aid, no injury
other
aid, no injury
lost
fatality
unknown
aid, no injury
lost
injury and aid
unknown
aid, no injury
exhaustion
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
exhaustion
injury, no aid
rockfall
aid, no injury
flooding
RESULT
INCIDENT TYPE
fatality
stuck
fatality
medical
fatality
unknown


********** 2 fatalities
unknown
fatality
lost
RESULT
INCIDENT TYPE
no injury, no aid
bad air
injury and aid
stranded
injury and aid
rockfall
aid, no injury
dog stranded in cave
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 70 ----------
Guam
Alaska
American Caving Accidents
2015 Cave Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
Larger dots = multiple incidents
N
1,000
Miles
2016 Cave Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
Larger dots = multiple incidents
N
1,000
Miles

---------- Page 71 ----------
2015 CAVING ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS


********** 8 January 2015
unspecified marble quarry, California
illness, aid, no injury
Long-time caver Ralph Squire has been work-
ing on cave digs in a marble quarry for more than 40
years. The entrance area is a pit that is climbed with
a ladder. On 8 January, Squire's family found him
in the pit, conscious, but hypothermic and unable to
get out on his own. Local rescue crews packaged him
and transported him to a hospital. The cause of his
medical event is unknown.
1. Roger Mortimer, e-mail communication, 6 March
Comments: One of the first rules of safe caving
is to never cave alone. If a caver becomes sick or in-
jured, it is helpful to have someone who can stay with
the patient while others go for help. Even minor mis-
haps while caving solo can have dire consequences.


********** 14 February 2015
Carroll Cave, Missouri
difficulty on rope/ladder, no injury, no aid
Dr. David Ashley, professor of biology at Mis-
souri Western State University, teaches a Cave Biol-
ogy class, which includes trips to a variety of caves
around Missouri to collect biological data and ana-
lyze the data as a class project. A trip to Carroll Cave
on 14 February consisted of Dr. Ashley, 10 students,
two experienced cavers (one an EMT), and trip lead-
er Bill Gee.
The entrance to Carroll Cave that the group
used is a man-made shaft 120-feet deep and about 30
inches in diameter. The shaft has a ladder bolted to
the wall with a stainless-steel cable running down it.
Cavers usually hang a rope in the shaft SO that they
enter by rappelling and exit by climbing the ladder
while attached to the rope with a harness and Croll.
A building over the shaft contains a life-rated winch
that can be used to haul a patient up the shaft. The
winch is hand-cranked with a 6:1 mechanical advan-
tage and has an automatic brake. Normal exit pro-
cedure is for the trip leader to climb the ladder first,
and then wait at the top to help inexperienced people
get safely off the rope and out of the shaft.
The caving trip and biological work was ac-
complished without incident in about seven hours.
Gee climbed the ladder first. After he got off rope,
the students clipped in and started climbing, assist-
ed by the experienced cavers at the bottom. As soon
as one person climbed a few feet, the next person
clipped in and started up. A female student (30) was
the fifth person to start. About halfway up the lad-
der, she complained of claustrophobia and difficulty
climbing. A few steps later, she passed out, her Croll
preventing a fall. Unfortunately, the EMT-caver was
at the bottom of the climb and could not reach her
to perform an assessment because at least one other
student was on rope below her. The people above her
rapidly completed their climb and were assisted off
rope by Gee, who then lowered the winch hook into
the shaft. Another student attached the hook to the
woman's seat harness. Gee and another person then
cranked the winch to bring her to the top. Gee had
to climb into the shaft briefly to detach the student's
Croll from the rope SO she could be raised completely
out of the shaft and into the building above it. By this
time, she was alert enough to hang onto the winch
cable while the operation was completed. She rested
in the building for a few minutes and then exited by
her own power to change her clothes. The remain-
ing students finished the ascent without any further
problems. The entire incident lasted about 15 min-
utes.
1. Bill Gee, Incident Report, 17 February 2015.
2. Bill Gee, e-mail communication, 17 December
2015.
Comments: The Carroll Cave Conservancy
equipped the entrance shaft with the winch for an
emergency such as this, and this group equipped
each caver with a harness and safety to prevent a
fall. While they should not be used to belay or catch
a fall (which would be fall protection), toothed as-
cenders can be safely used as progress capture or fall
prevention as in this incident. Cavers should weigh
the time-saving benefits of certain techniques against
the safety issues they may introduce. In this cave en-
trance, it saves time to have everyone climb at once,
but doing SO could lead to patient access issues in
case of a medical incident or gear problem.


********** 15 February 2015
Haunted Chasm Cave, California
equipment problem, injury, no aid
David Weaver and Steven Johnson (47) visited
Haunted Chasm to retrieve a rope bag that had been
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 72 ----------
Above, a caver rappelling into Carroll Cave on rope. A cable is in place for
emergencies. Photos by Bonny Armstrong.
Left, the Carroll Cave Conservancy's entrance to Carroll Cave. The winch
can be seen along the back wall.
left behind on a previous trip. The cave begins with
1. Steven Johnson, Facebook post, 15 February 2015.
a 40-foot drop, then a tight squeeze followed by an
2. Steven Johnson, e-mail communication, 5 January
2016.
additional 140-foot drop redirected off a nearby for-
mation.
After bottoming the second pit, neither caver lo-
cated the rope bag, SO they turned around and head-
modern lights are easy to inadvertently turn on while
ed out. Weaver ascended first; Johnson followed.
in a pack or inside clothing. Many of these lights can
Johnson successfully ascended the first 140 feet, and
get quite hot! Prepare accordingly.
at the snug spot had to "carefully contort" as usual to
get through the opening. Johnson is over 6 feet tall,
and with the added challenge of squeezing with his
vertical gear on, he found the ascent "tricky." Part-
way through the opening, he noticed a pain in his
chest that he assumed was a scrape from a rock, or
his Croll or spare light in his coverall pocket pressing
against him.
Once the cave was derigged and both cavers
juries when he fell inside the Skull Cave lava tube.
were out, Johnson pulled his spare light out of his
Skull Cave is one of the many lava tubes open to the
pocket only to discover it was turned on at full pow-
public for self-guided tours in Lava Beds National
er. The light was a 1000-lumen Zebralight H602w,
Monument. The accident reportedly happened near
the back of the cave where a ladder leads down to an
with a recent CREE emitter, and was very hot. It had
been on in his pocket probably since the squeeze, or
ice-covered floor. National Park Service (NPS) Rang-
about 20 minutes. Johnson was wearing a synthetic
ers responded until emergency crews could airlift
top under coveralls; none of his clothing appeared
the child to a hospital.
damaged by the heat. He had, however, developed a
2-inch-diameter blister on his skin, under the cloth-
cident and considering if new safety features should
ing. Johnson commented that there was no long-term
be implemented. Safety features already in place in
damage or unusual medical care, but that he does
Skull Cave include "non-slip, corrugated steps on the
now sport a "sizable scar."
ladder, as well as chain-link barriers in certain areas.
Each step has rounded-up edges to keep cave visitors
from slipping off to either side." Despite its popular-
American Caving Accidents
Comments: Many switch configurations on


********** 27 March 2015
Skull Cave, California
caver fall, injury and aid
A 5-year-old boy suffered head and other in-
Park staff are investigating the cause of the ac-

---------- Page 73 ----------
ity, with more than 25,000 visitors per year, this is the
first known incident to occur in Skull Cave.
1. Mike Reynolds, "Child Rushed to Hospital after
Fall in Park Cave," http://inside.nps.gov, 1 April
2015.
2. Tritan Hiegler, "Klamath Falls boy released from
hospital: Park officials look at new safety measures,"
www.heraldandnews.com, 3 April 2015.
Comments: Sometimes safety measures that
work for adults are inadequate for small children.
Freak accidents can occur where thousands of oth-
ers have safely trodden. This is similar to an incident
from Jewel Cave, South Dakota, on 28 May 2013.


********** 1 April 2015
Decorah Ice Cave, Iowa
caver fall, injury and aid
In the 1980s, unstable rocks in the ceiling of Dec-
orah Ice Cave prompted the Iowa State Parks Depart-
ment to install a gate, leaving only the first 50 feet
accessible to the public. On 1 April, a woman slipped
on the ice at the entrance and slid down further into
the cave, breaking an ankle. Local police, fire, rescue,
and ambulance crews responded to the scene and
helped the woman out. She was taken by ambulance
to a hospital.
1. "Woman rescued after slipping at Ice Cave,"
www.decorahnewspapers.com, 3 April 2015.
2. Jordan Kjome, e-mail communication, 29 Decem-
ber 2015.
3. James Hedges and George Knudson, "The Ice
Cave at Decorah, Iowa." The Annals of Iowa 43 (1975),
pages 113-131.
Comments: In ice caves, it is often necessary
to add additional ice traction to prevent slips. Some
ways that cavers can enhance traction include cram-
pons, elastic slip-on devices such as MICROspikes®,
or 1/4-inch hex screws screwed into their boot tread.


********** 5 April 2015
unspecified cave, New Mexico
caver fall, injury, no aid
A biology/caver team (Diana Northup, Debbie
Buecher, Bob Buecher, and Eric Weaver) and three
additional cavers entered an unspecified lava tube
in El Malpais National Monument near Grants. The
cavers were on the trip to take photographs for white-
nose-syndrome research. One of the cavers, Kenneth
Ingham (52), wore an internal-frame pack loaded
with photographic equipment; he uses this pack be-
cause the frame can be used as a light stand. On his
way into the cave, he moved along a ledge toward a
step down when his pack caught a low spot, knock-
ing him forward. He fell about 6 feet but landed on
his feet, absorbing most of the shock and energy in
his legs. He landed on the only flat rock in the area.
The group completed the trip but after exiting, Ing-
ham went to a doctor. The x-rays revealed no broken
bones, but Ingham reports that he limped for several
weeks after the trip.
1. Kenneth Ingham, personal communication, 13 July
2015.
Comments: Large packs, especially those that
protrude above the helmet, can catch on cave ceilings,
causing accidents and damage to speleothems. While
pack size should usually be kept to a minimum, cer-
tain underground activities will always require large
packs with lots of equipment. When undertaking
these activities, extra care should be taken to man-
age the heightened safety and resource risks. Ingham
was fortunate to have made such a safe landing. Even
a 6-foot fall onto breakdown rocks could cause griev-
ous injury, or even death.


********** 17 April 2015
Dry Creek Falls Cave, Tennessee
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
Megan Carden (21), Heath Rowland, Chris Hig-
gins, and Clinton Elmore entered Dry Creek Falls
Cave, a very wet multi-drop cave. Their intention
was to drop the first three pits and then climb out.
Elmore wore a full 3-mm wetsuit and the others
wore polypropylene for warmth. The group rigged
a 50-foot rope for the first two short pits (a 15-foot
pit followed by a 5-foot pit) and descended in wa-
ter, without difficulty. Elmore then rigged the next
drop, a 78-foot pit only 30 feet from the base of the
previous drop, using a "questionable bolt" backed
up by the rope from the previous drop, which was
tensioned to distribute the load. Water was flowing
into the pit from the top, but the cavers did not im-
mediately know there was another waterfall entering
the pit about 15 feet below the top.
Elmore descended through the waterfall and
moved out of the spray and fall zone. Carden rap-
pelled next. A short distance down, she was surprised
by the force of the water. She tucked her head down
and focused on breathing. When she felt a tug on her
hair, she tried to stop her descent to assess the prob-
lem. The force of the water made it difficult to stop,
and when she finally did, her hair was already pulled
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 74 ----------
into her micro-rack descender almost to her scalp.
Her hair was tied back at the start of her descent, but
difficulty to any trip. The cavers were only expecting
it came loose once she was under the full force of the
to do a quick in-and-out trip, SO most were not fully
two waterfalls. She attempted to do a change over,
prepared for extended exposure to cold water. Wa-
but since she was already SO close to the rack, she
terfalls can also make communication difficult in a
couldn't stand up high enough in her footloop to un-
vertical situation. These cavers were able to success-
weight it. She called out that she needed help.
fully work their way out of a difficult situation, and
The group had another rope, which Higgins
having an extra rope certainly helped.
rigged to the same questionable bolt and then used
to rappel to Carden. Higgins attached Carden to him-
self to help unweight her rack, and assisted her in
switching to ascent. He then descended and joined
Elmore while Carden ascended. By this time, Carden
was cold and tired, and frogging up into the waterfall
tired her further. With SO much water coming down,
she was unable to see anything around her. Sudden-
ly, her ascender would not move up the rope and she
three miles to explore and push leads in a Colorado
wasn't able to see why. Reaching out to the wall, she
cave. Shortly after entering the cave, Bristol chim-
found a projection and was able to pull herself out of
neyed up a 10-foot vertical slot through a roughly
the water enough to see that the two ropes were now
9-inch squeeze that appeared to have a small open-
twisted, stopping her ascent.
ing above. The opening looked like a blind pocket,
Higgins and Elmore could see that Carden had
but the cavers decided to climb up and look to be
again stopped, SO Higgins began ascending the sec-
thorough. With only a small wall pocket available for
ond rope. The rope tangle stopped him too, SO he
his left foot, Bristol was pushing hard off the front of
rappelled back down to the bottom. Meanwhile,
his foot to overcome the friction from the tight spot.
Carden had swung back into the waterfall and was
He felt a sudden pop followed by pain in the lower
able to untwist the ropes. Elmore and Higgins yelled
calf. Bristol was able to climb back down and return
over the falling water for Rowland to pull the second
to his teammates. After he removed his left boot, it
rope; their voices were heard and the second rope
was apparent that he had suffered a full rupture of
was removed. Elmore then ascended the primary
the Achilles tendon. Bristol was able to make the
rope but, as he approached the top, was surprised
three-mile hike back with the use of a trekking pole
to see Carden still on rope. His weight on the rope
and by walking only on the heel of his left foot.
had made it impossible for her to ascend past the lip.
She was now hypothermic and exhausted. Elmore
1. Derek Bristol, Incident Report, 2 July 2015.
passed her with his Texas SRT system by attaching
his cowstail to the carabiner on the bolt and his up-
per ascender to the upper rope (the backup anchor).
happen, yet it could happen to anyone. Plan for the
Elmore then reached down to Carden, grabbed her
unexpected with your gear choices, trip plans, rescue
D-ring, and physically hauled her up over the lip.
gear, surface watch instructions, and SO on.
Because of the difficulty in climbing through the
water, Elmore found a better anchor and rerigged the
78-foot pit for Higgins. Elmore then turned his atten-
tion to the hypothermic and exhausted Carden, first
assisting her to ascend the 5-foot pit, then warming
her with body heat and dry polypro. Higgins com-
pleted the ascent of the 78-foot pit and joined Elmore
and Carden; by this time he was also becoming hy-
pothermic. Higgins, Carden, and Rowland exited the
Arendt were setting their first survey station after
cave while Elmore derigged and hauled ropes.
traveling two hours into the cave to a lead. As Hamer
and Arendt worked to set the station, Zimmerman
attempted to pass them by climbing over a large
1. Clinton Elmore, Facebook post, 19 April 2015.
boulder. In the process, a handhold broke and Zim-
2. Clinton Elmore, e-mail communication, 19 Janu-
merman fell 10 feet, landing on his side and fractur-
ary 2016.
ing his left ulna (the longer and thinner of the two
3. Megan Carden, e-mail communication 27 Decem-
lower arm bones) just above the wrist. The cavers
ber 2016.
splinted his wrist and arm using a foam pad and duct
tape. With a little assistance, Zimmerman was able to
make his way out of the cave in only 2 1/2 hours.
American Caving Accidents
Comments: Water can add an extra element of


********** 9 May 2015
unspecified cave, Colorado
other (ruptured tendon), injury, no aid
Derek Bristol (46) and two other cavers hiked
Comments: No one expects this kind of thing to


********** 16 May 2015
Kaibab Caverns, Arizona
caver fall, injury, no aid
Bob Zimmerman (63), Dave Hamer, and Kayla

---------- Page 75 ----------
1. Bob Zimmerman, Incident Report, 12
October 2015.
Safety Break #1
Comments: American Caving Acci-
dents statistics show that most caving in-
SPLINTING
juries involve the extremities. The ability
to fashion a splint that is functional, safe,
Knowing how to splint an arm or leg bone from items in
and comfortable for the patient from items
your cave pack is a valuable skill. A splint should help to
in a cave pack is a valuable skill.
stabilize an injury and protect it from the environment.
Provide something rigid to immobilize the joints above
and below a fracture, or the bones above and below the


********** 17 May 2015
injured joint. Ensure you adequately pad any pressure
Schoharie Cave, New York
points and secure the splint well enough that it can en-
dure traveling through a cave. Check pulse and skin color
caver fall, injury, no aid
to make sure things aren't wrapped too tightly. Lastly,
add extra padding outside of the splint with available
After a Northeastern Regional Orga-
gear. Providing a cushion around the injury will help pro-
nization's spring event, four cavers visited
tect it and provide more comfort to the patient while ex-
Schoharie Cave. On their way out of the
iting the cave.
cave, a female caver (23), who was wear-
ing tennis shoes, stumbled over an under-
water rock and fell forward. She caught
herself with her (gloveless) hands, but cut
one hand deeply between the thumb and forefinger
and broke her wrist. The group was only 10 minutes
from the entrance, SO direct pressure was applied to
control the bleeding and they exited the cave where
better care could be given. The woman was driven
to a local medical facility where she received stitches
and a splint for her wrist.
1. Dylan Divito, Incident Report, 20 May 2015.
2. Dylan Divito, e-mail communication, 21 May
2015.
Comments: While we do not know that the ten-
nis shoes caused the accident, appropriate footwear
and gloves should be considered standard gear for
any cave trip. Much as a driver might ask his pas-
sengers to buckle their seat belts, experienced cavers
should hold trip participants responsible for adher-
ing to reasonable safety standards.


********** 23 May 2015
Neffs Cave, Utah
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
Caleb Ferbrache (30) led a group of cavers on a
trip to the bottom of Neffs Cave near Salt Lake City.
Neffs is vertically rigorous with nine drops requiring
690 feet of ropework to reach the bottom of the 1,163-
foot-deep cave. Ferbrache was aware that there was a
risk of his 6-inch-long beard being pulled into his de-
scending device. He had intended to tie up his beard
and secure it, but after completing the long, steep,
uphill hike to the cave, he realized he had left his hair
ties in his car. He decided to complete the trip to the
bottom of the cave by remaining aware and cautious
of the long hair on his face while rappelling.
He completed several rappels, but when he was
about 100 feet down the 200-foot-deep Great Pit, his
beard was pulled into his Petzl Stop descender. He
quickly noticed what had happened, stopped him-
self, and tied off his descender. The beard was quite
deep in the descender, but there was still about an
inch that was free. His immediate reaction was to
rip his beard out of the device. He used his hands
to break hairs when possible, and other times had to
pluck the hair from his face. It was a painful process,
but he was able to free himself in a couple of minutes.
Once he reached the bottom of the pit, he found a
scarf in his pack, which he wore around his face for
the rest of the trip. The team successfully made it to
the bottom of the cave and then exited without any
further complications. Ferbrache says he now wears
a Buff® scarf as a hood, as it keeps his beard pressed
close against his neck with minimal discomfort.
1. Caleb Ferbrache, Incident Report, 7 November
2016.
Comments: Ferbrache was wearing his ascend-
ing gear while on rappel, SO if he had failed on his first
attempts to rip the beard out, he would have quickly
been able to perform a changeover, completely un-
weighting the descender.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 76 ----------


********** 26 May 2015
tachment for a large-frame rack, if the D-ring is
unspecified cave, Kentucky
twisted relative to the rack while rappelling, torque
can be applied to the carabiner gate, either by the D-
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
ring or more likely by the rack, breaking the locking
sleeve and opening the carabiner while loaded. This
On 26 May, a group of cavers was on a survey
is known as a cross-load or rollout failure and may be
trip in a Kentucky cave. A male caver (27) with a light
at even greater risk of occurrence in narrow confines
pack was rappelling down a 24-inch-diameter steel
like a culvert or narrow pit, when the rappeller has
culvert using a six-bar SMC rappel rack attached to
something to push or twist against and may not have
his harness D-ring with an Omega Pacific locking D
all his/her weight applied to the device. The rope it-
carabiner. The carabiner and the harness D-ring were
self may apply torque if it is sufficiently twisted and
both locked. About 25 feet above the floor, the caver
the rappeller is not turning. Or, the rappeller may
removed the sixth bar on the bottom of the rack and
also be able to apply torque to the rack by leaning
continued rappelling another 5 to 10 feet. Shortly af-
into a loose bar or twisting the descender by hand.
ter that, the caver became detached from the descent
system and fell, landing unhurt at the base of the
and rappel tests are followed, it is still possible to
culvert. The rack was still attached to the rope about
have a carabiner fail on rappel if it becomes cross-
10 feet above his head and the carabiner was still at-
loaded and torque is applied. Replacing carabiners
tached to the harness D-ring. In short, his carabiner
with quicklinks on certain rappel devices, namely
had opened and become detached from the rappel
racks, and particularly those racks with large attach-
rack.
ment rings, may remedy this situation. The failure
Upon inspection after the incident, it became
of the carabiner locking mechanism isn't specific to
apparent that the Omega Pacific carabiner's locking
make and model of the carabiner or rack. Rather, the
mechanism had failed, allowing the gate to open
result of the torque applied by certain types of rappel
mid-rappel when it became cross-loaded. This was
racks to cross-loaded screw-gate carabiners that can
obvious because the exterior locking cylinder had a
cause them to fail. This accident has been duplicated
notch missing. The notch was from where the narrow
by others, and the results can be seen in various on-
segment of aluminum inside the lock of the carabiner
line videos. Cavers can prevent this failure mode by
gate had pushed through the locker. The carabiner
being aware of it, using a connector that is not prone
that failed had seen some abuse from several years
of regular caving, but nothing out of the ordinary,
according to the caver.
1. Anonymous, Incident Report, undated.
2. From an interview conducted by Tom Wood, 13
January 2016.
Comments: When using a carabiner as the at-
Above, the carabiner from the May 2015 Kentucky incident, showing
damage to the locking mechanism.
Right, a depiction of how the rack frame may have levered open the
carabiner gate.
American Caving Accidents
Even if the safe practices of locking carabiners

---------- Page 77 ----------
to it, using two carabiners as attachment, or clipping
the short cowstail into the rack as a backup attach-
ment while rappelling.


********** 30 May 2015
Neffs Cave, Utah
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
Nick Steele (26) and three other Utah cavers par-
ticipated in a trip to the bottom of Neffs Cave. The
1,163-foot-deep cave has a series of numerous ver-
tical pitches that requires a considerable amount of
rigging. The cave had been recently rigged by mem-
bers of the Salt Lake Grotto, SO this group was not
rigging or derigging as they went. As the cavers were
ascending back to the entrance, Steele was the sec-
ond climber on a 100-foot pitch. As he ascended to a
lip he could see the rig point above him and realized
the carabiner between the webbing anchor and the
rope was cross loaded. He cautiously made his way
over the lip and ascended a few more feet to where
he could safely get off rope. As he corrected the rig-
ging for the next caver, he realized that the carabiner
was also unlocked.
The first caver who had gone up the rope had
not taken the slack out of the rigging when he got off
rope. He had also left to start the next climb before
seeing Steele load the system.
1. Nicholas Steele, Incident Report, 14 January 2016.
Comments: "Off rope" doesn't just mean off
rope. When we call "off rope" at the top of a pitch,
what we are really saying is, "I'm off the rope and
out of the fall zone. I have checked all the rigging
and have made sure that everything is safe, includ-
ing carabiner loading and locking. I have checked
that the rope is on all rope pads, off of sharp edges,
and hanging free from snags and ledges. The rope
is safe and ready for you to ascend." We must do a
quick survey of all of these conditions before calling
"off rope." Often, ropes get pulled off of rope pads
and carabiners rotate when a caver is getting off rope
at the top of a pitch. In this case, a quick look back
would have caught the cross-loaded carabiner (likely
rotated after unweighting), and would have been
simple to remedy. While fixing the carabiner orienta-
tion, the unlocked gate would likely have been dis-
covered and fixed as well. In his report, Steele men-
tions, "Because the cave was pre-rigged, I think our
normal checks and normal way of thinking about
rigging was altered a bit, which led us to be less cau-
tious."


********** 19 June 2015
Jewel Cave, South Dakota
caver fall, injury, no aid
On 19 June, five cavers entered Jewel Cave for a
four-day camp trip in the newly established Western
Camp. On the way to camp, the cavers approached
an area known as the VACC (Victory After Con-
tinuous Contortions). The first three cavers entered
the VACC, with Ian Chechet (29) going fourth. As
Chechet approached the VACC, he began to climb
up and over a boulder that cavers have been climb-
ing over since 1982. He explains, "As I began to ma-
neuver around the top of this rock (to the left), I put
my hand on it to pull myself up. I maintained three
points of contact while making this move. As I gen-
tly pulled against the rock, it started to shift, slowly
at first. I tried to move out of the way, but it began
moving faster and faster towards me. The only op-
tion was to let go of the rock to avoid being crushed.
As I let go, I began falling backwards and eventually
fell towards the floor headfirst."
The rock rolled about 5 feet before becom-
ing wedged. Chechet fell about 10 feet, then rolled
downslope through a hole in the floor. He called for
his teammates who quickly returned and assisted in
conducting a medical assessment. He suffered nu-
merous cuts and contusions to his legs, back, and
elbows. The team advised him to sit and relax and al-
low the adrenalin to wear off to see if he noticed any
other pain. After cleaning and dressing some of his
wounds, Chechet thought he felt all right, but after a
group discussion, the team decided to abort the trip.
Chechet exited the cave unassisted but experienced
pain in his left heel and shin on the way out.
1. Ian Chechet, Trip Report, 19 June 2015.
Comments: Unfortunately, rocks that have been
stable and part of a trade route for many years can
suddenly decide to move. Chechet's reflexes prob-
ably prevented greater injury. While likely a difficult
decision for cavers that had planned for weeks and
traveled hundreds of miles, it was prudent to abort
the trip. A remote underground camp is not always
the best place to assess the extent of and monitor an
injury. Returning to the surface affords opportunities
to recover in comfortable and sanitary conditions,
along with access to advanced medical care should it
become necessary.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 78 ----------
to hike the woodland trails in a conservation park in
Singhampton, Ontario. He had not told anyone of his
plans to visit an area of the park where several crev-
ice caves are located. Shortly before dark, two hikers
heard shouts for help and located Rowe, trapped 36
feet below ground in a crevice cave.
and narrows to 15 inches. Rowe attempted to squeeze
between the rocks, but when he got to his chest he re-
alized he wouldn't be able to fit any farther. He put
his foot on a piece of rock in an attempt to climb out
of the crevice but the rock gave way. He slid down
the passage and became stuck. Rowe was trapped
approximately 36 feet down and 18 feet away from
the cave entrance.
Above, lan Chechet points to the rock that shifted and caused him to fall
authorities.
in Jewel Cave. The green outline shows the rock's original location. NPS
photo by Dan Austin.
plied him with water, granola bars, and blankets.
Below, a diagram of Chechet's fall. NPS photo by Dan Austin.
An air chisel was required to free him. On Sunday
morning, 22 hours after he had first entered the cave,
rescuers pulled him to the surface. He had suffered
minor injuries after entering and then falling farther
into the cave. The cost of the rescue operation was
reportedly more than $46,000.
1. Robyn Doolittle, "Ontario man 'lucky' to be alive
after 22 hours trapped in crevice," www.theglobe-
andmail.com, 21 June 2015.
2. John Musselman, "Ontario hiker who was
trapped in cavern thanks rescuers," http://toronto.
ctvnews.ca, 23 June 2015.
3. Greg Warchol, Incident Report, 24 June 2015.
4. "Clearview Township to cover cost of cave res-
cue," http://barrie.ctvnews.ca, 30 September 2015.
5. Christian Stenner, "Submissions for American
Caving Accidents," 1 January 2017.
10 feet to
hole in floor,
the temptation can be to explore just a short distance
14 feet total
solo, it is usually better to return later with a team-
or at least ensure that someone knows which cave
you have entered.
American Caving Accidents


********** 20 June 2015
unnamed crevice cave, Ontario, Canada
caver fall, injury and aid
"I just dropped like a stone."
Seth Rowe (30) set out on a Saturday morning
The entrance to the cave is about 20 inches wide
The hikers that discovered him contacted local
While rescuers worked to free Rowe, they sup-
Comments: When finding a cave, as strong as

---------- Page 79 ----------


********** 30 June 2015
Timpanogos Cave, Utah
other (bear spray deployed), no injury,
no aid
During a public tour, a visitor accidentally dis-
charged bear spray in the cave. The visitor had recent-
ly been hiking in Yellowstone National Park and still
had his bear spray in its holster attached to his day
pack. The visitor was asked by the ranger tour guide
to wear his pack on his front to avoid inadvertently
hitting low-hanging formations. Wearing his pack on
the front placed his pack straps and the bear spray on
his back. As the visitor ducked under a low spot near
a large formation known as The Heart, the bear spray
bumped the ceiling, causing it to discharge. Most of
the spray was contained by the holster and the visi-
tor's shirt, but the visitor's nephew, who was behind
him, received some spray in his face. Other members
of the visitor's family who were in the back of the
tour group found it difficult to breathe as they then
passed through the area.
When the group assembled at the next stop on
the tour, the ranger leading the group was informed
of the incident. The ranger led her group out of the
cave and notified other rangers of the accidental
spray. Other tour groups already in the cave were
evacuated and tours were canceled for the rest of the
day. Visitors affected by the closure were either re-
scheduled or offered a refund.
All doors to the cave were opened for the next
several hours to allow the cave to air out. The con-
crete tour trail and handrails in the affected area were
wiped down with isopropyl alcohol, as suggested by
the bear-spray manufacturer. Tours resumed the fol-
lowing morning.
Visitors in the cave at the time of the incident
reported some temporary itching and burning sensa-
tions in the throat but no lasting effects.
1. Bonny Armstrong, Incident Report, 30 June 2015.
2. Cathy Allred, "Bear spray causes temporary clo-
sure of Timpanogos Cave," www.heraldextra.com,
30 June 2015.
Comments: Inspection of the bear spray re-
vealed that the safety device on the can was missing,
unbeknownst to the visitor. Bear spray is considered
a weapon and is therefore not allowed on cave tours.
The visitor did not know this, and the ranger did not
notice the bear spray on the visitor's pack.


********** 5 July 2015
Stephens Gap Cave, Alabama
stranded, aid, no injury
Rob Cordle (34) and a friend visited Stephens
Gap Cave without any caving gear. The cave has
two large entrances, one is a walk-in entrance and
the other requires a 143-foot rappel. While his friend
climbed atop the Pedestal formation, Cordle climbed
out along a ledge, tracking mud onto the ledge as he
proceeded. When he turned to go back, he found that
the mud made travel too difficult. He told his friend
he needed help. Luckily, a group of cavers from the
Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit happened to be arriv-
ing at the cave just then.
Michelle Edwards rappelled as close as she
could to the stranded man and threw the bottom of
her rope to him. He was able to pull her over to him
and once on the ledge, she assisted him in putting on
a harness. After attaching Cordle to her own harness,
she rappelled with him to the floor of the cave. From
there, they exited through the horizontal entrance.
1. Holliday Williams, Incident Report, 28 September
2015.
Comments: Although sometimes easier said
than done, it is good practice to think about how you
will get out of a situation before you put yourself in
it. Some cave surfaces can be easily traveled when
dry, and only become hazardous once tracked with
mud or water.


********** 6 July 2015
Big Four Ice Caves, Washington
2 fatalities, other (ice cave collapse)
The mile-long trail that leads to the Big Four Ice
Caves in Snohomish County, Washington, is a pop-
ular hike for thousands of visitors each year for its
scenic appeal and cool, summer temperatures. The
caves are the site of several past ice collapses, some
of which have resulted in fatalities. A U.S. Forest
Service sign near the caves states, "People have been
killed and injured in and on the ice caves-be safe,
not sorry!" but it is often ignored by visitors intent on
entering the caves.
On 6 July, when the temperature was near 80°F,
several people entered the cave. Eyewitnesses report
they heard a loud crack, followed by falling ice and
debris. Annalisa Santana (34) was killed in the col-
lapse and her brother, David Santana (25), was criti-
cally injured. Survivors hiked back to the trailhead
and drove 15 miles until they could get cell phone
reception and call for help. At least three other people
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 80 ----------
were hospitalized with injuries ranging from severe
lacerations to broken legs. David Santana died from
his injuries three months later.
1. Manuel Valdes and Phuonge Le, "Woman's body
pulled from popular Washington ice cave: Warm
weather this year in Washington has made the for-
mation unstable," http://registerguard.com, 8 July
2015.
2. Travis Pittman, "34-year-old woman's body
recovered from ice cave collapse," www.usatoday.
com, 8 July 2015.
3. "Ice cave collapse claims another victim: Months
after a Moreno Valley mom of four died in the
tragedy, her brother has succumbed to his injuries,"
www.pe.com, 12 October 2015.
vived the collapse without injury, told the Seattle
Times she "... " saw the warning signs outside but
went in anyway, because I didn't see anything that
seemed to point toward a collapse and others were
already in the cave."
porary duty in Guam when he and a friend decided
to visit Marbo Cave. Marbo Cave is a popular swim-
ming destination for both locals and tourists. It is
one of the island's few freshwater caves and was an
important water source for Japanese troops during
WWII.
of the cave, Bellairs told his friend he didn't think he
could swim back out. His friend left for help but when
he returned he discovered Bellairs had drowned. At-
tempts at resuscitation were not successful.
1. Pat Curtis, "Iowa National Guard soldier dies in
accident in Guam," www.radioiowa.com, 27 July
2015.
2. Kyle Daly, "Airman drowns," www.guampdn.
com, 27 July 2015.
Top, a caver is stranded in Stephens Gap Cave after tracking mud across
a narrow ledge. Photo by Brad Brown.
least one previous drowning.
Middle, Michelle Edwards (far right) tosses her rope to the stranded
caver. Photo by Brad Brown.
Bottom, after fitting the stranded caver with a harness and securing him
to herself, Michelle Edwards rappels with the caver to the cave floor.
Photo by Brad Brown.
American Caving Accidents
Comments: An 18-year-old woman, who sur-


********** 25 July 2015
Marbo Cave, Guam
fatality, drowning
Senior Airman Drew Bellairs (21) was on tem-
After swimming into the dark zone in the back
Comments: Marbo Cave has been the site of at

---------- Page 81 ----------


********** 15 August 2015
Scapegoat Cave System, Montana
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
Brian Gindling, Daryl Greaser, and Kathryn Mc-
Claine entered the Green Fork Entrance of the Scape-
goat Cave System to attempt the first through trip and
exit the Kathy's Icebox Entrance. After eight hours of
cold and wet travel, they encountered a canyon, less
than 2 feet wide that separated the two main sections
The gear used to improvise rigging of the last drop of a through trip in
the Scapegoat Cave System. Photo by Brian Gindling.
of the cave. The only way to avoid the water in the
bottom of the canyon was to crawl along very thin
ledges on either side. While they squeezed through
this section, a cave pack was inadvertently dropped
into the water where it sank before the cavers could
retrieve it. The pack contained all of the rope, web-
bing, and carabiners needed for the vertical exit.
The cavers were wet and cold and decided they
would continue a quarter mile to Kathy's Icebox
rather than turn around. They hoped to find rope
and rigging materials along the way, left from ex-
plorations that had entered that side of the system.
When they reached Kathy's Icebox, they had col-
lected four locking carabiners, 40 feet of 6-mm corde-
lette, 30 feet of a rat-chewed 11-mm static rope, 7 feet
of seat belt webbing packstraps, and a 10-foot-long
Spectra@climbing sling to use for the 100-foot-deep
drop. Although cavers usually rig to bolts and rappel
the entire length, some sections can be downclimbed.
Gindling explains, "I first attached a carabiner to the
bolt and used the cordelette with the pack strap at-
tached to the bottom to climb down the first section
and onto an isolated pillar of rock peeling off the cliff.
I then used the sling around a breakdown rock and
attached the rat-chewed rope for the rappel off the
pillar."
1. Brian Gindling, Incident Report, 15 November
2016.
2. Brian Gindling, e-mail communication, 17 No-
vember 2016.
Comments: The ingenuity and resourceful-
ness of the cavers led to a successful outcome. Dur-
ing a rescue or an incident like this one, it is good
to remember that multi-drop caves often contain an
available gear cache. To help prevent situations such
as this one, distribute essential gear among several
packs to limit the severity of the situation if one pack
is lost.


********** 20 August 2015
East Crater Cave, Washington
bad air, no injury, no aid
The summit craters of Mount Rainier contain the
world's largest network of volcanic steam caves. In
August 2015, an expedition was conducted to study
and explore the caves. The caves are formed in the
summit glacial ice cap by heated gases emerging from
fumaroles in the volcano crater. The research team
consisted of fourteen cavers who camped in the sum-
mit crater for six days. The team was well equipped
with gas monitors, passive respirator masks, rescue
and safety equipment, and an accompanying medi-
cal doctor. A full self-contained breathing apparatus
(SCBA) was available 3,000 feet below the summit at
a lower camp on the mountain. On the fourth day at
the summit, a team of two experienced cavers, Chris-
tian Stenner (35) and Nicholaus Vieira (34), was ex-
ploring and surveying chambers connecting to two
large entrances close to the summit. The ground was
a thin layer of mud and loose rocks slanted steeply
downward at 50 degrees. Stenner was moving down
to pick a survey station when his feet slipped out
from under him. He fell, sliding out of control down
the slope and over a lip, finally coming to a stop a
few feet from the bottom of the chamber.
Stenner explains, "My heart rate had shot up
along with my breathing. At first I thought my pulse
was elevated because I had just taken a fall and the
breathing was due to the altitude. Nick couldn't see
me. He shouted to ask if I was ok, but I couldn't an-
swer. My labored breathing had escalated to gasping
and as I looked around I saw that the ice wall of the
chamber met the floor in a pile of boulders. I realized
that my gasping was because I was in a pocket of bad
air, and as I had that realization, a slight panic set in.
I turned around to face the slope. It was steep. With
my brain and body now in oxygen deficit I hesitated;
at that moment I didn't think I had the energy or ca-
pacity to climb. Feeling like I was about to pass out,
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 82 ----------
I made the choice to try. Otherwise I was suffocat-
climbed onto a formation called the Pedestal. He fell
ing. I grabbed onto the rock wall in front of me, dug
off and was killed from the 50-foot fall.
in with my feet and with a burst of effort was able
to scramble up about 4 or 5 feet. It was just enough
the cave's vertical entrance assisted local authorities
height, and the air there just good enough, that I
with the body recovery.
felt like I wasn't going to go unconscious. Even so,
I huffed and puffed at this level for a minute trying
1. Kelsey Kern, "Update: Name of teen killed in
to gain the strength to talk or climb further. I finally
tragic Jackson County accident released," http://
had enough breath to form words, and told Nick that
whnt.com, 6 September 2015.
I was ok and also to 'get the gas monitor.' Where he
2. Adam Ganucheau, "Despite dangers, caving in
was, 15 to 20 feet above, the gas monitor came to life
Alabama soars in popularity," www.al.com, 13
with multiple alarms, for 18.9% Oxygen concentra-
September 2015.
tion and 3% CO2 concentration. Nick announced the
3. Holly Williams, Incident Report, 30 October 2015.
monitor results and that we had to leave. I climbed
up to him, and we both proceeded to exit the cave.
The monitor stayed in alarm until we were almost to
good rule of thumb to stay more than a body length
the entrance."
away from the edge unless clipped in to a safety line.
If one needs to approach the edge, it can be done in a
1. Christian Stenner, "Caving in the Crater: The
prone position instead of standing.
Canadians on the 2015 Mt. Rainier Fumarole Cave
Expedition." The Canadian Caver, number 82, pages
8-21, Fall 2016.
Comments: Though the team was well-equipped
and prepared for volcanic gas issues, the gas monitor
was not in the possession of the lead member and
was not on at the time of the incident. Having it on
may have provided early warning and immediate
an unguided recreational trip. Access to the cave is
notification of the bad air.
controlled by a cave-guiding company, which grant-
ed a permit. The permit recorded the planned under-
ground route and pre-arranged call-out time. When


********** 6 September 2015
the cavers failed to meet their call-out time, the guide
company dispatched a guide to check for the cavers.
Stephens Gap Cave, Alabama
The cavers' vehicle was still in the parking lot and
fatality, caver fall
there was no sign of them at the entrance. The guide
company called for Alberta/British Columbia Cave
After obtaining permits, Patrick Werszner (18)
Rescue, and a callout was initiated to form initial re-
and his girlfriend hiked to Stephens Gap to see the
sponse teams to search the cave.
cave and have lunch. During their visit, Werszner
route and their call-out time, but had not commu-
Cavers assist agency personnel on a body recovery at Stephens Gap
nicated that to the company and call-out person.
Cave. Photo by Holliday Williams.
They emerged safely under their own power just as
the rescue callout had commenced. The callout was
stood down within minutes, but twelve cave rescuers
had already begun a response.
1. Christian Stenner, Incident Report, 7 September
2015.
2. Adam Walker, personal communication, 7 Sep-
tember 2015.
by the guiding company collected good informa-
tion meant to assist any potential rescue callout. Any
changes to call-out times or procedures should be
clearly communicated to whoever has responsibility
as surface watch.
American Caving Accidents
Local cavers who were just arriving to rappel
Comments: When near exposed edges, it is a


********** 6 September 2015
Rats Nest Cave, Alberta, Canada,
other (overdue), aid, no injury
Two novice cavers entered Rats Nest Cave for
The two cavers had changed their planned
Comments: The permit procedures established

---------- Page 83 ----------


********** 10 September 2015
Raccoon Mountain Caverns, Tennessee
stuck, aid, no injury
A 7th grade student on a school field trip became
stuck in Raccoon Mountain Caverns. The young girl
reportedly slipped and got her leg caught between
two rocks. The Chattanooga-Hamilton County Res-
cue Service Cave and Cliff Team responded but did
not supply any additional information.
1. Valeria Sistrunk, "Young girl is rescued from a
cave during a routine field trip," www.wdef.com, 10
September 2015.


********** 2 October 2015
Scott Hollow Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, injury and aid
A group of six cavers entered Scott Hollow
Cave, intending to do a four-hour trip to the Double
Waterfall area. The group consisted of
five cavers from Baltimore, Maryland,
and was led by local caver Kyle Mills. An
hour and a half into the trip, one of the
Safety Break #2
Maryland cavers fell while negotiating a
climb down breakdown. The 18-year-old
FIELD PHONES
man fell 10 feet, landing in an awkward
position. Mills, who is a certified Wilder-
Like the cockroach, surplus army field phones can prob-
ness First Responder (WFR), assessed the
ably survive a nuclear holocaust. Why is this important?
patient and found that he had broken
Some of the places cavers go underground are more than
both bones in his lower right leg. First
just a hop, skip, and a jump from the entrance. Com-
aid was administered and the patient was
mercially available radios generally don't work in caves.
moved to a more comfortable position.
Should there be a rescue in the depths of the cave, the
Two people left the cave to summon help.
use of wired field phones will reduce the amount of time
They placed a call to 911 at 1630.
it takes to send messages in and out. If it takes eight hours
Agency rescue groups were notified
to travel from the entrance to the incident location, then
as well as local cavers, the Blacksburg
it takes 16 hours for a runner to make a round trip. Once
Cave Rescue Group, and members of the
the field phones are in place, communication is quick,
VPI Cave Club. The first rescue group en-
easy, and more accurate.
tered the cave at 1800 and brought a Stokes
litter to begin packaging the patient. The
next group entered at 1935 to lay wire for
field phones, establishing communication
from the cave to the surface. More help
began to arrive at the surface.
Rescuers began moving the patient
shortly before 2100. At one point 51 peo-
ple were in the cave. Tony Smith was ap-
pointed Underground Coordinator and,
with assistance from Steph Petri, soon co-
ordinated the rescuers to efficiently move
the patient through the cave (this was no
small feat, as the patient weighed close to
A TP-25 Field Phone from the Czech Republic.
250 pounds). The patient was at the en-
trance shortly after midnight. The final obstacle was
to haul him up the entrance culvert. Carl Amundson
directed this part of the operation and the patient
was on the surface by 0100 with all rescuers out of the
cave 45 minutes later. The patient was transported to
a hospital and released on 5 October.
1. Ed Saugstad, "Incident in Scott Hollow Cave,"
The West Virginia Caver, December 2015, volume 33,
number 6, page 9.
2. Kyle Mills, "Scott Hollow Cave Trip Report,"
The West Virginia Caver, December 2015, volume 33,
number 6, pages 10-12.
Comments: The efficient, successful outcome of
this rescue speaks to the commitment to rescue train-
ing in the area by local agencies and by cavers at-
tending National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC)
trainings. Many of the rescuers involved regularly
cave together and have trained for rescue together.
Having a WFR in the caving party allowed for a reli-
able medical assessment to be performed and com-
municated to the surface as quickly as possible.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 84 ----------


********** 3 October 2015
Pond Cave, Arizona
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
Larry Zimmer, Mike Van Note, and Joel Laws
visited Pond Cave for a day of exploring and survey-
ing. Zimmer tied a rope to a nearby tree to use as a
handline for a 10-foot pit just inside the cave's en-
trance. At the end of the day, Zimmer and Van Note
decided to check one more passage as Laws headed
out. When Laws reached the bottom of the pit, he
pulled on the rope to take out any slack and was sur-
prised when the rope fell down the pit, landing at
his feet.
The pit lacked good handholds, but Laws was
able to climb out after a few attempts, taking one
end of the rope with him. On the surface, he found
a section of the rope and a carabiner still tied around
the tree. The rope had clearly been cut. There were
also fresh hatchet marks on the tree and on others in
the area. Laws rerigged the rope SO the other cavers
could climb out.
After the cavers had exited safely, the three no-
ticed two young kids (about 7 and 10 years old) with
a hatchet chopping at the base of trees across the val-
ley. When an adult joined them, Laws went to speak
with him. Laws explained what had happened and
This rope, rigged as a handline at the entrance of Pond Cave, was cut by
how serious it could have been if the rope had been
children with a hatchet. Photo by Larry Zimmer.
absolutely necessary. The adult questioned the kids,
but they denied any involvement. The adult apolo-
gized to the cavers.
fusing hands-and-knees crawl. About 40 cavers were
1. Joel Laws, Incident Report, 10 January 2016.
in the cave at the time doing a restoration project,
and they recommended the hands-and-knees crawl
to the students. The university group chose to do the
Comments: In areas where entrance ropes have
climbdown, even though the rope ladder they were
the potential to be molested, it can be good practice
expecting was missing. While doing so, one student
to leave someone on the surface as a rope guard. An-
slipped and fell a few feet. He bruised his knee and
other technique in larger pits is to rig a rebelay just
sprained his thumb. The injured student decided to
below the lip where it cannot be accessed from the
continue, and the group explored the cave until he
surface. This ensures that a rope compromised at
became uncomfortable and asked to leave the cave.
the surface will not break while a caver climbs out.
However, it can be difficult to determine when these
The group was not able to get all the students back
up the climb and didn't know the alternate way out
measures might be necessary. The team in this inci-
of the cave. One restoration caver led the group and
dent had no reason to think their rope would be in
one followed the group to the entrance through the
danger.
hands-and-knees crawl. Once outside the cave, the
group hiked 0.7 miles back to the car. The injured
individual was assessed by an athletic trainer, who


********** 10 October 2015
determined that no further medical attention was
Lick Creek Cave, Montana
necessary.
caver fall, injury, aid
1. Amy Grisak, "Montana cave gets a facelift," Great
Falls Tribune, 14 October 2015.
A group from the University of Great Falls was
2. Ian Chechet, e-mail communication, 29 October
visiting Lick Creek Cave. About 50 feet into the cave,
2015.
the passage splits, offering a choice of a slick and
3. Jake Clark, e-mail communication, 7 March 2016.
slightly exposed 10-foot climbdown or a slightly con-

---------- Page 85 ----------
Comments: Trip leader Jake Clark mentions that
it would have been wise to have an extra rope along
for when ropes expected to be in the cave are found
to be missing or damaged.


********** 24 October 2015
Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico
medical issue, aid, no injury
A team of four cavers visited Fort Stanton Cave
to collect samples in conjunction with Dr. Victor
Polyak's paleoclimate research. The team entered
the cave at about 1045 and made its way to the Tro-
phy Room (more than one mile from the entrance)
without incident, arriving just before 1300. The team
completed the sample collection and started out of
the cave at 1515.
Shortly after beginning the return trip, Steve
Peerman (65) felt weak and dizzy, and called for a
rest. After a brief rest, they continued out of the cave,
but Peerman found that his heart was racing and he
was very weak. He realized he would need help and
sent the two youngest cavers (Justin Peinado and
Chrissy Allen) out to summon assistance, while he
and Evelyn Townsend started slowly making their
way out of the cave.
Peerman could go only a short distance be-
fore having to rest. It took four hours to get almost
through Crystal Crawl, where other cavers met them
and helped them get to 20 Steps (0.44 miles from the
entrance), where they were met by a rescue team. The
EMTs immediately put Peerman on a heart monitor
(his resting heart rate was between 170 and 190 beats
per minute) and started an IV. They were eventually
able to bring his heart rate down to normal, and he
was able to walk out of the cave. He was transported
by ambulance to the Ruidoso Hospital Emergency
Room, and then to the Las Cruces Memorial General
Hospital, where he was examined by a cardiologist.
The diagnosis was a supraventricular tachycardia
(SVT) event. Peerman was discharged from the hos-
pital on 26 October.
1. E-mail to Southwest Cavers, 27 October 2015.
2. Steve Peerman, "The Events of October 24, 2015,"
undated.
Comments: Peerman reports he is now in good
health.


********** 15 November 2015
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
other (muscle injury), injury, no aid
Tim Williams (50) was making his way up a
climb that was slippery with corrosion residue when
he slipped. He was able to push forcefully with
his left leg to stop his fall. Unfortunately, the large
amount of force necessary to stop the fall injured
the quadriceps muscle in his thigh. When a cramp-
ing feeling caused him to investigate more closely,
Williams noticed that a knot of muscle was bulging
outward from the inside of his thigh. The accident
occurred on the second day of an eight-day, nine-
person survey expedition based at Deep Seas Camp
in the Western Branch. Williams rested his leg for an
hour, compressed the injury with athletic tape, and
was able to make the 2.5-hour trip back to camp ac-
companied by his teammates.
In camp, another expedition member who is
a medical doctor examined the leg and suggested
that Williams may have torn the fascia around the
quadriceps, causing muscle tissue to herniate out-
ward through the tear (this was later confirmed to be
the correct diagnosis). By taking a rest day in camp,
medicating with ibuprofen, wrapping the injury with
athletic tape, and being careful not to take big steps
with his left leg, Williams was able to participate in
shorter survey trips away from camp throughout the
week.
To exit the cave, expedition members divided
up and carried items from Williams' pack, leaving
him with a half-weight camp pack to carry out. On
the way out of the cave, his team left early, with the
rest of the expedition an hour behind in case there
were any problems. There were none, and the second
team did not catch up with Williams' team until they
reached the vehicles at the trailhead. Williams' team
of three made the 1,000-foot ascent from Deep Seas
Camp to the surface in three hours. After that and
the 1.5-mile surface hike, Williams' good leg was sore
and cramping from ascending more than 500 feet of
rope and managing all the stepping up and down
along the route while protecting the injured leg.
1. Tim Williams, Incident Report, 2 December 2015.
Comments: Under the right circumstances, al-
lowing time for a patient to rehabilitate and recover
underground can be the right decision. In warmer
caves or caves with camp or bivouac supplies, it can
be prudent strategy. This was a well-equipped expe-
dition with medically-trained participants, personal
first aid supplies, and access to an in-cave cache of
additional first aid supplies. Also, the planned week-
long camp in the cave provided good conditions for
Williams to rest and care for his leg. From the acci-
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 86 ----------
dent site, it was much easier for Williams to reach
camp than it would have been to try to head for the
entrance. All of these conditions led to the treatment/
evacuation decisions that were made. Williams was
able to recover somewhat in the cave, to the point
where he was able to cave with caution and exit the
cave under his own power.
than providing warmth, food, and liquids..."


********** 21 November 2015
of cavers went to Nuevo León to finish resurveying
caves on a ranch known as Minas Viejas. This group
Cherylsbad Cave, Oklahoma
was larger than the previous year's group and in-
medical issue, no injury, no aid
cluded some cavers who would be touring the caves
but not necessarily be a part of a survey team. The
Three cavers from the Central Oklahoma Grotto
survey teams were working in Pozo de Montemayor,
entered Cherylsbad Cave for a day of surveying. The
a deep cave that requires extensive vertical work.
three cavers were all experienced and had been in the
Those who were not surveying were very interested
cave before. After six hours of surveying, the group
in seeing the cave. The survey teams explained that
put away their instruments and began making their
the cave was likely beyond the skill level of some of
way toward the surface. Along the way, one of the
them, and they suggested that the group visit an-
cavers, a woman (69), informed the other two that
other less challenging vertical cave instead. Every-
she was having difficulty breathing and was feeling
one agreed that a different trip would suffice. When
very weak. The group rested for about 45 minutes
this trip went well, the survey teams decided that
and the woman took some Excedrin. The other two
everyone could rappel into the first section of Pozo
cavers considered going for help on the surface, but
de Montemayor but strongly suggested that they not
after evaluating the distances involved in getting a
rappel down The Big Pit (also known as Former 400
rescue to the cave location and then into the cave it-
Pit), a pit just shy of 400 feet deep. The only other
self, they decided to just work at helping get their
stipulation was that one woman (23) in the group,
friend out of the cave. The cave passage in this area is
who had been having some difficulty with heights,
horizontal but very rocky, with numerous boulders
stay with a more experienced companion while in
to climb up, around, or under. The sick caver was
the cave. Again, everyone agreed.
able to navigate the remainder of the cave, with as-
sistance over the "tricky spots." Once out of the cave,
Pit, they began making their way deeper into the
they still faced a hike of about 0.25 miles over uneven
cave. At the next pit, Matt Zappitello, who was at the
ground back to their vehicle. They were in an area
back of the group, heard someone calling his name
with no cell-phone service, SO they drove directly to
somewhere behind him. He went back a short dis-
the closest hospital, where upon a medical diagnosis
tance to find the 23-year-old female rappelling down
it was determined that she had suffered a mild heart
The Big Pit. She had decided to continue on alone
attack.
even though her companion had advised against it.
Zappitello then had to make a choice, abandon his
1. Dale Amlee, Incident Report, 18 January 2016.
survey team and climb out with her, or let her join the
2. Dale Amlee, e-mail communication, 19 January
survey team. After some discussion, she convinced
2016.
him that she felt strong enough to join his team.
Comments: This is the second report in this is-
heading for the entrance. Thirty feet up The Big Pit,
sue of ACA of someone with a heart condition self-
the young woman began having difficulty. She would
rescuing from a cave. Fortunately, both patients were
not perform a changeover and she did not want to
able to continue to the surface with assistance. In
continue climbing. Eventually, with encouragement
some cases, patients with heart conditions may be SO
from below, she began climbing a few feet at a time
weak as to require litter transport, even after medical
followed by rest breaks. Another survey team arrived
intervention.
at the bottom of the pit and the two teams waited. By
the time she reached the top, the cavers at the bottom
were huddled together under emergency blankets.
The others then ascended out of the pit and Zappitel-
lo and one other caver stayed with the woman. Here
they discovered that she had not brought enough
food or water for the trip but had not told anyone.
Sharing their food and water with her gave her more
American Caving Accidents


********** 25 November 2015
Pozo de Montemayor, Nuevo León,
Mexico
exhaustion, no injury, no aid
"Luckily, the rescue did not involve anything other
Over the 2015 Thanksgiving holiday, a group
After the survey teams had rappelled The Big
When the team finished surveying, they began

---------- Page 87 ----------
strength to continue. The trip out of the cave, which
the teams normally do in three hours, took just over
10 hours. They arrived in camp as others were form-
ing a rescue party.
1. Matthew Zappitello, Incident Report, 15 February
2016.
2. Matthew Zappitello, e-mail communication, 16
February 2016.
Comments: In his analysis of whether he should
have delayed the survey and immediately escorted
her out or not, Zappitello concludes, "It was an in-
credibly tough decision and I have concluded that
we all need to trust each other's self assessments un-
til someone is proven to be incapable of safely assess-
ing their own strengths and weaknesses. Without
that trust, we cannot ever cave with strangers. But, it
can open us to some bad experiences like this. I just
hope that everyone is smart enough and comfortable
enough to admit when they can't do something SO
we can avoid these situations. We all need to be con-
scious to create an atmosphere that encourages peo-
ple to admit when they don't feel comfortable with
something."
Safety Break #3
(ALPINE) BUTTERFLY KNOT
Knots and ties can go by many names. Whether you call it an Alpine Butterfly, Butterfly, or Lineman's
Loop, this tie has many uses and should be part of your rigging repertoire. It is a midline knot that,
when tied properly, holds its shape and stays in place. Since you don't need the ends of the rope to tie
this knot, it can be used any place along the line. Some of its many uses include making an improvised
clip-in point or isolating a damaged spot in the rope. It can be load-
ed end-to-end or pulled from the bight, making it very versatile.
Remember: Knot-tying is a skill that should be practiced. There are
different ways to tie rope and get the same result, so figure out
what works for you. No matter what you call it or how you tie it,
always dress it and inspect it before using it.


********** 27 November 2015
Pozo de Montemayor, Nuevo León,
Mexico
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
During their Thanksgiving holiday expedition
in Nuevo León, five cavers entered Pozo de Mon-
temayor for a survey trip. Four cavers rappelled Ar-
gos Well (360 feet) without incident. As the fifth caver
passed the last of the pit's four rebelays, a section of
the rope "felt a little funny" as it passed through his
brake hand and then "hitched" as it passed through
his rack. This concerned him enough that he stopped
to inspect the rope and found that the sheath was
completely separated, revealing three inches of the
rope's core. The caver immediately clipped his as-
cenders above the damage and removed his rack from
the rope. Tying a butterfly knot in the rope, he was
able to isolate the bad spot. Performing a changeover
back to descent, he continued to the bottom. When
he reached his companions, he asked if any of them
had noticed a problem with the rope. They had not.
Since the other four cavers were less experienced in
vertical caving, they may not have had the experi-
ence to notice the beginning of a problem, or the rope
somehow became damaged between the fourth and
fifth cavers' use.
At the end of the trip, the first caver to ascend
past the butterfly noticed that weighting the rope had
pulled the rope's bad spot back into the knot. Luckily
the rope held, and a butterfly knot, this time with a
bigger bight, was retied. The rope came from a spool
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 88 ----------
of 11-mm Highline Rope that was purchased specifi-
cally for the trip and first rigged the day before the
incident. A reason for the damage could not be de-
termined.
1. Matthew Zappitello, Incident Report, 15 February
2016.
cave with waterfalls, vertical pitches, and tight crawl-
2. Matthew Zappitello, e-mail communication, 28
ways; it is considered a sporty cave even for experi-
enced cavers. Access to the cave is controlled with
December 2016.
a locked gate, and on 5 December, six cavers were
Comments: A rope's condition should be in-
given access for a day trip.
spected by every user, on every use, SO as to find and
correct issues before they become serious. In a dis-
higher and swifter than usual, but their experience
cussion of this incident, Zappitello said, "
another
level gave them the confidence to keep going. One
takeaway for me was that when isolating a problem
caver exited the cave early, leaving five in the cave.
area in the rope, you should be generous with the
The remaining cavers descended the Bastard's Crawl,
bight containing the bad spot. That is especially true
an awkward, sloping, hands-and-knees crawl to the
with wet ropes, which this one was."
top of the Double Trouble waterfalls. After rappel-
ling the 75-foot waterfall, the cavers took a break and
cooked a hot meal. They continued a short distance
after that until one of the cavers suggested they start


********** 28 November 2015
heading out, since everyone was getting quite cold.
Bisaro Anima, British Columbia, Canada
Back at the top of the waterfall, it became apparent
other (overdue), no injury, aid
that the water was up quite a bit. Unbeknownst to
those in the cave, a rainstorm had unexpectedly de-
At 1110, Alberta/British Columbia Cave Rescue
veloped.
received an e-mail from a designated call-out person
for some overdue cavers. Three cavers were due to
enter the Bastard's Crawl, this time traveling up,
come out of Bisaro Anima, a remote and deep cave
against the flow of water. The force of the water was
undergoing exploration, and rendezvous with a heli-
tremendous, and the airspace above the water was
copter at 1000. The cavers had a satellite phone, and
slowly diminishing. Two cavers made it through,
the call-out person had not yet heard from them.
but Jason Storie (44) found that the force of the wa-
Minutes later, further contact was received, stat-
ter coming through the crawlway pushed him down
ing that the helicopter landed on the mountain and
into a narrow wedge. His body acted like a cork in
that there was no sign of the cavers. The pilot stated
the passage and the rushing water rose to his ears
he would wait awhile and then fly out. Cave rescue
and began washing over him. Andrew Munoz (32),
started to make preparations. At 1322, cave rescue
the trip leader, tried to help Storie. Munoz's GoPro®
was contacted and told that the cavers were out of
captured footage of several terrifying minutes while
the cave and on the helicopter.
he helped coax Storie back out. Eventually, Storie
Further investigation with the involved group
freed himself with Munoz's help. Storie was by now
confirms a communication error with regard to call-
hypothermic, SO Munoz and another caver got him
out and pick-up time. The cavers were in an under-
out of the water and wrapped him in a space blanket.
ground camp and departed camp at 0600. They ex-
They used a small camp stove to heat water and pour
ited the cave at 1300 hours which was as they had
it into Storie's cave suit. (Later they found it more ef-
planned. There were no issues causing a delay.
fective to make hot water bottles and place them on
Storie.) The level and strength of the water continued
1. Christian Stenner, Incident Report, 29 November
increasing and threatened to wash the three cavers
2015.
over the waterfall.
Comments: Clear communication is important
make it through the crawl while he stayed with Sto-
when establishing a rescue call-out time, especially
rie. That caver met the other two on the far side of the
when costly helicopter transportation is involved!
crawl, and the three exited the cave to call for help.
When Storie was rewarmed, he and Munoz made an-
other attempt to exit, but by now the water was even
higher and they were turned back. The only place
to get out of the water was a small, steeply sloping
ledge, barely large enough for the two of them. They
spent the next 14 hours on the ledge, not knowing if
American Caving Accidents


********** 5 December 2015
Cascade Cave, British Columbia, Canada
stranded, aid, no injury
Cascade Cave in British Columbia is a technical
In the cave, the cavers found the water to be
At the top of the waterfall, the cavers had to
Munoz encouraged the other caver to try to

---------- Page 89 ----------
their teammates had made it out safely.
The other cavers had made it out and initiated a
rescue response. Rescuers made it to within 25 feet of
the stranded cavers but could not make contact. They
decided to wait for the water to go down.
Munoz and Storie kept a close eye on the water
levels, and when they saw the water level finally be-
gin to drop, they made another push for the entrance.
This time they were successful; they arrived at the
bottom of the entrance pit just as rescuers were mak-
ing their way into the cave.
1. Gina Noelle Daggett, "Duncan men recall har-
rowing cave expedition near Port Alberni," http://
vancouversun.com, 29 May 2016.
2. Doug Munroe, Incident Report, December 2016.
3. Christian Stenner, "Submissions for American
Caving Accidents," 1 January 2017.
4. Andrew Munoz, Incident Report, 3 February 2017.
Comments: In his report, the trip leader pro-
vides an excellent analysis of what the group did
wrong and what they did right. In retrospect, he be-
lieves their biggest error was in misjudging the force
of the water. Munoz writes, "The level of water was
passable but the force should have alerted me to the
fact that ascending was going to be an issue. If there
was any increase in flow it would be VERY hazard-
ous. However, I was suffering from risk hardening.
With five years of commercial cave guiding in Wa-
tiomo, New Zealand, I had developed great skills in
the water and was projecting that onto the group."
While the water may have caught them by surprise,
they were well-equipped for emergencies. Having ra-
tions, a stove, and a rugged emergency blanket likely
saved the pair's life as they sheltered in place, cold
and wet, for 14 hours. They also mentally prepared
for a wait of unknown duration. While struggling to
stay perched on their ledge, Munoz advised Storie,
"We have no way to tell how long this is going to last,
and things are probably going to get dark from time
to time. The most important thing is that we stay to-
gether as a team and don't turn on each other."
For dramatic video coverage of this incident, see
http://vancouversun.com/news/local-news/caving-
in-cascadia-a-story-of-survival. The incident is also
featured in the Mountain Rescue Association's webi-
nar series, March 2017.


********** 20 December 2015
unspecified talus cave, New Jersey
other (bear attack), injury, no aid
Boy Scout leader Christopher Petronino (50)
wanted to show three Boy Scouts a talus cave he had
been visiting since the 1980s. He had been in the cave
two weeks prior. When they climbed up the hillside
to enter it, he stuck his foot into the 2-foot-wide en-
trance. A black bear grabbed his foot and pulled him
into the cave, then proceeded to bite him on the leg,
arm, neck, and head. Petronino hit the bear in the
head with his rock hammer, pulled his sweatshirt
over his head, curled into a fetal position, and yelled
to the Scouts to go and get help. The Scouts called
911, but couldn't tell the dispatcher exactly where
they were. They built a signal fire to help searchers
find them. Petronino instructed the Scouts to leave
some food at the entrance of the cave. They did and
then observed the bear exit the cave. A dog that was
with them then barked and chased the bear up the
hill. Petronino exited the cave and called 911 again,
an hour and 20 minutes after the first call. A helicop-
ter took Petronino to the Morristown Medical Center
for treatment of his severe lacerations.
1. "Boy Scout leader, 'wanted to show scouts small
talus cave," never encountered bear before," http://
abc7ny.com, 21 December 2015.
2. Jason Koestenblatt, "Bear attacks, traps scoutmas-
ter in cave," http://patch.com, 21 December 2015.
3. Richard Cowen and Scott Fallon, "N.J. scouts who
aided in rescue from bear mauling hailed as he-
roes," www.northjersey.com, 21 December 2015.
4. Avianne Tan, "911 call reveals bravery of 3 Boy
Scouts during bear attack in NJ," www.abcnews.
go.com, 29 December 2015.
5. Rebecca Ibarra, "Hear it: 911 call detailing New
Jersey scoutmaster bear attack released," www.
nydailynews.com, 29 December 2015.
Comments: New Jersey's black bear population
is on the rise, with an estimated 3,500 bears. Black
bears den for the winter, but do not enter a deep hi-
bernation. One questions why Petronino was enter-
ing the cave with rock hammer in hand, but a whack
to the head with it and some food was apparently
enough to persuade the bear to lose interest in him.


********** 27 December 2015
Cemetery Pit, Georgia
exhaustion/difficulty on rope, no injury,
no aid
Five cavers entered Cemetery Pit to continue
working on a dome climb. On 27 December, they
found the dome was unusually wet SO they decided
not to climb that day. After three hours in the cave,
they started their exit. One at a time, three of the cav-
ers made their way up the 153-foot entrance pit. Tim
White climbed fourth and waited at the top for the
final caver. After a while, White realized he had been
waiting a long time. Ron Miller came back into the
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 90 ----------
cave to see if everything was alright. Just then, the 50-
year-old caver on rope yelled up, "Tim, I can't climb
anymore!" Checking the rope, White and Miller
could feel the rope was tensioned. He was only about
50 feet up the rope. They yelled back that they would
set up a haul system, but that he should keep trying
to climb on his own.
The drop had been rigged from bolts as a Y-
hang using a double figure-8 knot. The remaining
few feet of tail was rigged as an approach line. The
cavers on top used 30 feet of 8-mm cord to build a 3:1
haul system to pull the mainline up enough to create
slack in the mainline. With the climber's weight now
on the 8-mm cord, the mainline was rerigged as a 3:1
using webbing around a boulder as an anchor. Once
his weight was transferred back to the mainline, the
cavers began to haul him up. Even with only 4 feet
of throw, and significant friction at the bolts where
the rope went through a carabiner, the haul system
worked well enough that the fifth caver was hauled
the remaining 100 feet out of the pit. His difficulty on
rope was due to his wearing a large pack full of bolt-
ing and climbing gear on his back. The extra weight
pulling him backwards was too much for him to
overcome and he quickly became too exhausted to
continue climbing.
1. Tim White, personal communication, 8 May 2016.
2. Michael Hopkins, e-mail communication, 28 De-
cember 2016.
Comments: Using a tether to hang a heavy pack
below a caver is usually more efficient than wearing
it. Fortunately, the cavers on top were trained and
highly skilled in cave-rescue techniques; White is an
NCRC instructor.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 91 ----------
2015 CAVE-DIVING ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS


********** 17 January 2015
Devils Eye Spring, Florida
fatality, illness
Jack Gregory (63) of Marietta, Georgia, and Gra-
ham Murray were planning to use diver propulsion
vehicles (DPVs) to get to the Sweet Surprise area in
Devils Eye Spring. They were then going to push the
DPVs through to the Mainland area, get back on the
main guideline, and use the DPVs to exit. According
to Murray, Gregory turned (aborted) the dive sud-
denly in Sweet Surprise. At one point, Murray turned
around to check on Gregory and found him slumped
over his scooter. Gregory's regulator was still in
his mouth, but he was unresponsive. Murray tried
to purge air from his own regulator into Gregory's
mouth, but Gregory was still unresponsive. Murray
returned to the surface for help. Gregory was recov-
ered by International Underwater Cave Rescue and
Recovery (IUCRR) divers.
Gregory was using sidemount tanks and had
used all of the air in his right tank. His left tank still
had 1800 psi. Friends report that Gregory had been
doing long, extensive dives all week. He was over-
loaded with gear, video equipment, and a heavy
DPV with added extra weight to make it negatively
buoyant.
1. Forrest Wilson, Incident Report, 27 January 2015.
Comments: Jack Gregory was a certified cave
diver with more than 100 logged cave dives. This
may have been too ambitious a dive for the physical
condition he was in at the time.


********** 25 February 2015
Sistema Camilo, Quintana Roo, Mexico
fatality, lost, medical issue
On a Wednesday afternoon, three divers began
their first dive during a trip to Quintana Roo. At ap-
proximately 1400, Keith Price (72), Tom Corwin, and
Bill Lavine entered Cenote Muchachos, one of the
cenote entrances to Sistema Camilo. The divers all
had many years of experience and were familiar with
this cave. Information later gathered from Price's
dive computer was used by Bil Phillips to reconstruct
this scenario: At approximately 35 minutes and some
1,800 feet penetration distance into the dive (under-
water depth of approximately 60 feet), the divers
reached their gas-turn-around pressures. The divers
signaled to each other and started their exit toward
the cave entrance. At this time, or very shortly there-
after, visual contact with Price was lost. One of the
divers claims that he saw Price's light to the right side
of the guideline and at a deeper depth than the other
two divers. The divers began a short search for the
missing diver, backtracking and looking with their
lights for signs of their buddy until they were forced
to leave the cave due to their gas reserves.
At approximately 1500, the two divers exited
Cenote Muchachos and asked one diver's wife if the
missing diver had surfaced. The answer was "No."
The two divers informed the caretakers at the cenote
site that there was a missing diver in the cave. By this
time, the surviving divers assumed that the victim
had either perished in the cave by exhausting his gas
supply, or he had exited the cave system by another
entrance. An underwater search team did a prelimi-
nary search of the main line and 150 feet down each
side passage. The only clue observed was a bubble
trail that led deeper into the cave. When that trail was
lost, the team ended their search for the day. Land
searches did not find Price at any of the cenotes they
checked.
The underwater search resumed the next day.
Divers again found and followed a bubble trail. It
eventually led to Cenote Camillo, where Price's two
dive cylinders were found at the water's edge; the
tanks had 450 and 500 psi respectively. A diveline
led into the jungle. The divers called out but heard
no response, SO they returned to Cenote Muchachos
to inform the surface team.
Once the surface team located the cenote, they
followed the guideline into the jungle and found
where Price had discarded his fins and helmet. The
guideline ended after 200 feet, but Price's trail was
discernible from branches he had broken, pointing in
his direction of travel. More than 1,600 feet from the
cenote, Price was found face down on the ground. He
was still wearing his mask with prescription lenses,
wetsuit, hood, cave diving harness, buoyancy com-
pensator, lights, and dive computer. An autopsy de-
termined that a heart attack was the cause of death.
1. Bil A. Phillips, "Sistema Camilo Cave Diving Inci-
dent, February 25-26, 2015, Tulum, Quintana Roo,
Mexico," undated.
Comments: It is not clear why Price separated
from his group and began following an adjacent line.
That line had permanent arrows, which he followed,
but they led away from his point of entry. Phillips
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 92 ----------
concludes his report, "At some point, the victim had
breathing gas. That would have been enough if noth-
to realize that the guideline he was following would
ing had gone wrong, and they had been able to use
not lead to his original entry point. He encountered a
their DPVs to exit. It isn't a good idea to push a DPV
few jump lines coming from other directions. He fol-
into a low silty area. We can only assume that Jurich
lowed one (without the use of a jump reel to maintain
left the DPV behind because it was making it hard
a continuous guideline). This second line contained
to follow the guideline in low visibility. He likely
line markers pointing further into the cave. This line
would have survived if they hadn't stirred up the
in turn came to an abrupt end, and the victim chose
silt, he had kept the DPV with him, he had made it
to make another 'visual gap' without the use of a
to the larger tunnel before Dudas left, and/or he had
guideline. Including his original departure from the
carried a stage tank of extra breathing gas.
main line that the team used to enter the cave, the
victim made a total of three 'intentional visual gaps'
neglecting to maintain a continuous guideline to his
original exit. By pure chance his wanderings led him
to Cenote Camillo. He was able to surface here be-
fore exhausting his gas supply. By him attempting
to reach his vehicle and starting point overland, we
can guess that he was overcome by the combination
of physical exertion, dehydration, and overheating.
tana Roo, rented a single SCUBA tank from his uncle
As stated in the autopsy, a heart attack was the cause
at a dive facility in Tulum. The SCUBA tank, full of
of death. Although this accident did not occur in the
normoxic gas, was rented with the understanding
cave environment, the cause of death was a direct re-
that the diver would be visiting open water locations
sult of poor decisions made by the cave diver during
along the coastal region of Sian Ka'an Biosphere Re-
the dive."
serve. The diver was Open Water certified. He did
not hold Cave Diver or Cavern Diver certifications.
cinto Pat security gate to enter the Dos Ojos Cenote


********** 26 April 2015
Park at 0800 Thursday morning. The Ejido person-
Devils Eye Spring, Florida
nel did not ask for his diving certifications or check
fatality, silt, lost guideline, out of air
his diving equipment. After a short drive inland, he
parked his vehicle at the main Dos Ojos Cenote Park
Robert Jurich (68) and Evelyn Dudas, from Penn-
parking area and carried his open-water equipment
sylvania, entered Devils Eye Spring planning to use
past a park employee. She was the last person to see
diver propulsion vehicles (DPVs) to get to the area
this diver alive.
known as Mainland, which is approximately 3,000
feet from the entrance. They had planned to push
region of Sistema Sac Actun. Diving in open-water
their DPVs through a low, silty area in Mainland,
SCUBA configuration and with his GoPro camera,
continue through an area called Sweet Surprise, re-
he found the "Cavern" traverse guideline leading to
join the main passage, and exit the cave. In the begin-
the East Ojo. The East Ojo entrance is plainly visible
ning of Mainland, they stirred up the silt and became
once a diver has submerged from the West Ojo cav-
separated. Dudas managed to find her way back to
ern zone. It is believed the diver did a visual jump
the larger passage and waited for Jurich. When he
from this West Ojo to the East Ojo permanent traverse
didn't return, she exited the cave to get help. A re-
guideline to a parallel guideline that deviates to the
covery team entered the cave several hours later, and
Bat Cave entrance in the same cave system. This sec-
found Jurich, deceased, about 400 feet from the en-
ondary guideline continues toward the Green Room
trance.
that contains a small cenote entrance opening. From
According to Lamar Hires, who led the recovery
the Green Room, it is possible to continue the tra-
effort, Jurich's DPV was found partially embedded
verse to the East Ojo cenote exit. There is little doubt
in silt, which would have made it impossible to op-
that the victim had done prior guided tours in this
erate without removing it from the silt. Once it was
area of the Dos Ojos cave.
removed, it was in working order.
Dive Center entered the East Ojo with his cavern tour
1. Lt. Jeff Manning, "Gilchrist County Sheriff's Office
group around 0845 on the same date. His dive plan
Press Release," 27 April 2015.
included leading his tour group to the Green Room.
2. Lamar Hires, e-mail communication, 19 May 2015.
During this tour, he noticed a blinking LED common
to GoPro cameras in record mode, and he found a
Comments: Jurich and Dudas were using only
body in open-water SCUBA equipment pinned to the
side-mounted 85 cubic feet tanks, with no additional
cave ceiling. The body was located off the permanent
American Caving Accidents


********** 28 April 2015
Sistema Dos Ojos, Quintana Roo, Mexico
fatality, unknown, diving solo
A young male living in Playa del Carmen, Quin-
The diver paid his entry fee at the Ejido San Ja-
The diver entered the West Ojo of the Dos Ojos
A cave-certified dive instructor from the Akumal

---------- Page 93 ----------
guideline by some distance. This instructor moved
the body to the Green Room cenote exit. Local au-
thorities were called but could not revive the diver.
1. Jim Coke, "Sistema Dos Ojos Cave Diving Ac-
cident Report, Municipio de Tulum, Quintana Roo,
Mexico," 9 November 2015.
Comments: It is not known what became of the
GoPro® video, but it may provide some answers to
what went wrong. Cave diving requires a significant
amount of specialized training. This diver did not
have that training.


********** 8 June 2015
Volusia Blue Spring, Florida
fatality, ran out of air
Rhys Dervan (56) and his 16-year-old son were
diving at Blue Spring State Park on a Monday after-
noon. When the son decided he was finished diving
for the day, the father said he was going to do one
more dive and meet his son later. When his father did
not show up an hour later, the younger Dervan noti-
fied authorities. Rescue divers responded and found
Devils Eye Spring, Florida. Photo by Gene Page.
Dervan's body a short way into the cave. He had run
out of air and drowned.
1. Patricio G. Balona, "Man dies while cave diving at
Blue Spring State Park," www.news-journalonline.
com, 8 June 2015.
2. David Sutta, "Cave Diving Death under Investiga-
tion in Volusia County," http://miami.cbslocal.com,
10 June 2015.
Comments: No other information was available.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 94 ----------
2015 CAVING-RELATED ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS


********** 3 January 2015
unnamed cave, Kentucky
dog rescued from cave
A dog named Trudy entered an unnamed cave,
probably chasing a raccoon. The tight entrance has
meeting in San Antonio, cavers participated in a
a stream flowing from it that prevented the owners
recreational cave trip in Real County, Texas. After a
or anyone else from reaching the dog. Trudy's own-
three-hour trip, several cavers were heading toward
ers obtained permission from the landowner to dig
their vehicles parked 150 yards downhill. A light rain
a hole to try and reach her. A backhoe excavated an
had made the ground and rocks slippery, contribut-
opening to another tight passage closer to Trudy, but
ing to Tom Florer (46) slipping and twisting his an-
she refused to come out and still no one could quite
kle. Florer made it to his vehicle where he took some
reach her.
naproxen sodium for the swelling and wrapped his
On Trudy's fifth day underground, the animal
ankle in an ACE bandage. An x-ray later revealed he
rescue organization, Almost Home, contacted cav-
had fractured his fibula.
ers. Thor H. Bahrman III organized other cavers and
went to Trudy's aid. The cavers made more progress
1. Tom Florer, Incident Report, 28 March 2015.
at enlarging the entrance. Eventually, Alex Roberts,
donning a wetsuit, was able to reach her and bring
her out of the cave.
one at almost any time. Florer said that one impor-
tant lesson he learned was "You cannot buy a pair
1. Thor H. Bahrman III, Incident Report, 10 January
of crutches in San Antonio, Texas, at 8:00 p.m. on a
2015.
Sunday evening."
Comments: It's not uncommon for dogs to chase
raccoons into caves and small crevices. This same
group of cavers rescued another dog from a different
cave only one week before. While rescuing Trudy,
two dog collars and one dog corpse were found in
the cave.
Grotto made a long drive from central Oregon to a


********** 5 March 2015
remote location in the southeast corner of the state.
unspecified cave, Missouri
The next morning, the group left camp to ridgewalk,
dog rescued from cave
looking for lava tubes. The area is sage-covered des-
ert and basalt floes. The day saw the first hot temper-
In March, a shepherd-mix named Lucious wan-
atures of the year, and there were no trees for shade.
dered 20 miles from home and entered a cave lo-
cated on a cliff. For three days, the dog whined and
make the 2.4-mile hike back to camp while the others
yelped but wouldn't come out. Two Independence,
continued ridgewalking and checking out lava tubes.
Missouri, animal control officers were able to sedate
Halfway back to the vehicles, a 26-year-old female
Lucious with a sedative-laced donut and then grab
in the group of two began to have difficulties due to
him with a snare pole. The sleepy, 50-pound dog was
the heat and a pre-existing medical condition. Her
then lowered off the cliff by rope.
partner had a radio, but the batteries had died. The
woman was told to sit and rest in the shade of a boul-
1. Kasey Babbitt and Robert Townsend, "Dynamic
der while her partner went to see if a vehicle could be
duo rescues dog stuck in cave," http://fox4kc.com, 11
driven in to pick her up.
March 2015.
caver got supplies and fresh batteries for the radio
Comments: Lucious is a bad boy.
and hiked back to the woman. When he returned to
the boulder, she was gone. Feeling slightly better,
she had attempted to continue hiking but went the
American Caving Accidents


********** 8 March 2015
unspecified cave, Texas
caver fall hiking from cave
After the March 2015 NSS Board of Governors
Comments: Slips and falls can happen to any-


********** 6 June 2015
ridgewalking, Oregon
illness, aid, no injury
Thirteen members of the Oregon High Desert
In the early afternoon, two cavers decided to
The terrain was too difficult for a vehicle, SO the

---------- Page 95 ----------
wrong way. When her symptoms returned, she again
rested in the shade of a boulder and attempted to call
for help on her cell phone. One call to her mother was
successful and her mom contacted EMS who sent an
ambulance and a deputy.
By 1900, the other cavers had been notified of
the emergency and began searching for the missing
caver. She was located around 2030 and escorted back
to the vehicles. The request for EMS services was can-
celed when she appeared to be doing better.
1. Neil Marchington, "Eastern Oregon Caving/
All home and fine," e-mail to Oregon High Desert
Grotto, 7 June 2015.
2. Neil Marchington, e-mail communication, 4 De-
cember 2015.
Comments: In his report, Marchington explains
that, while many in the group had two-way radios,
there was some confusion in their operation that
made communication during the incident ineffec-
tive. He also suggests: "More people should have
had GPS receivers with the truck and route marked.
A GPS point of [the patient's] location would have re-
ally helped, and a GPS would have kept [her] on the
right track. Many of the people along did not have
their GPS on them. There were about 5 for 13 peo-
ple." If the patient had stayed in place, the other cav-
ers would have found her sooner, even without GPS
receivers.. A patient who wanders puts themselves
and others at greater risk.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 96 ----------
2016 CAVING ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS


********** 1 January 2016
other side of the pit, SO McMillan traversed along the
Byers Cave, Georgia
pit, using a slight protrusion on the right wall. Not
caver fall, injury and aid
finding a suitable location for the survey station on
the far side, he returned to the near side of the pit,
using the same protrusion, and set the survey station.
A group of cavers from Atlanta received per-
After taking the shot, McMillan once again crossed
mission from the Southeastern Cave Conservancy
the pit, this time to check a lead at the bottom. He
to explore Byers Cave. During their trip, an experi-
again used the wall protrusion for stability. Unex-
enced caver (63) stumbled and fell about 20 feet. He
pectedly, the protrusion broke, and he fell 9 feet into
received multiple injuries to his head, shoulders, and
the pit, landing among jagged breakdown.
back. Two cavers on the trip left the cave to call for
help, and more than 40 rescuers from various agen-
to his aid. Blood was already soaking through Mc-
cies and volunteer rescue groups responded. The res-
cue operation lasted through the night and required
multiple vertical-haul systems to bring the patient to
the surface. He was then airlifted to a nearby hospital
in critical condition.
1. Kate Smith, "Man had proper training and experi-
ence to navigate cave; in critical condition after cave
rescue," www.wrcbtv.com, 2 January 2016.
2. Emmett Gienapp, "Spelunker rescued from Dade
County cave after falling 25 feet," www.timesfree-
press.com, 2 January 2016.
3. Greg Mathis, Incident Report, undated.
Comments: This man was on a horizontal cave
trip, yet required multiple haul systems to be brought
out of the cave. This incident in Byers Cave is a good
example of how a horizontal cave can become a verti-
cal cave during a rescue.


********** 16 January 2016
Jewel Cave, South Dakota
lan McMillan received this wound from a fall when he was six hours
caver fall, injury, no aid
from the Jewel Cave entrance. Fortunately, he and a teammate had
well-stocked personal first-aid kits. Photo courtesy of lan McMillan.
Six cavers entered Jewel Cave to spend four
days underground at the newly established camp in
the western portion of the cave. On the second day of
Millan's tights. McMillan and Ohms both had person-
the trip, the cavers traveled nearly four hours from
al first-aid kits. Ohms and Austin assisted in cleaning
camp. They stopped briefly at Hourglass Lake to col-
and bandaging a large wound on McMillan's calf and
lect water samples and split into survey teams. Dan
a less serious laceration to his arm. The seriousness
Austin, Rene Ohms, and Ian McMillan (26) formed
of the injuries convinced the team they should start
a team to survey leads south of the lake, while the
making their way out of the cave. On their way to
others planned to survey near the Limestone Lunch-
camp, Ohms found the other team who joined them.
room. The teams set a rendezvous time of 2300, plan-
ning to be back at camp by 0300.
midnight, they decided it would be better to spend
As survey began, McMillan took the lead, set-
the night and make the long trek out the following
ting stations in virgin passage heading south off the
day. By this time McMillan was experiencing nausea
map. Just a few shots into the survey, he came to a
and finding it difficult to eat. The group broke camp
shallow pit in the floor. The passage continued on the
at noon the next day and traveled slowly, reaching
American Caving Accidents
Austin and Ohms heard him fall and rushed
When the cavers reached camp shortly after

---------- Page 97 ----------
Rescuers carry an injured patient out of Tumbling Rock Cave. Photo by Amy Hinkle, courtesy of the Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit.
the entrance at 1830. Teammates drove McMillan to
the hospital where physicians, concerned over the
possibility of infection, decided not to stitch up the
wound. McMillan flew home to Hawai'i where a
physician concurred it was best to let the wound heal
naturally.
1. Daniel Austin, Incident Report, 3 March 2016.
Comments: Jewel Cave National Monument
held an After-Action Review SO that trip participants
could discuss the incident. Although McMillan and
Ohms carried their own first-aid kits, the cavers had
never discussed who was carrying what first-aid
supplies and some assumed the in-cave rescue packs
were sufficient. Jewel Cave cavers will now start car-
rying two park-supplied first-aid kits, splitting up
supplies among team members.


********** 16 January 2016
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
rockfall, injury and aid
During a group outing to Tumbling Rock Cave,
a large boulder unexpectedly dislodged and rolled
onto the foot of a girl (15), crushing her foot and an-
kle. Some members of the group stayed with the girl
while others went to get help. A call to 911 resulted
in several rescue groups arriving at the cave between
1800 and 2000.
The patient was about a mile into the cave, be-
yond a tight section known as the Suicide Passage.
Local cave rescue groups had participated in rescue
trainings in this area previously, and they knew that
a patient could not be transported in a Ferno® litter
through the Suicide Passage due to its small spaces
and twisting nature. The patient would either need
to be assisted through without a litter or the passage
would need to be widened. A caver experienced with
passage modification was sent in to widen the pas-
sage enough to move the patient through in a SKED®
(a more flexible type of litter). Due to safety concerns,
the passage modification was completed with hand
tools instead of explosives. Once the patient was
moved through the Suicide Passage, she was repack-
aged into a FernoR.
Evacuation teams worked together to carry the
patient over breakdown and up and down slopes
while maintaining a belay for safety. The patient was
brought to the surface at 0145 and flown to Erlanger
Health System for treatment of her injuries.
1. Chase Erwin and Franklin White, "Rescuers bring
injured girl to surface after hours trapped in cave,"
17 January 2016.
2. Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit, Incident Report,
undated.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 98 ----------
Comments: A spokesperson for the Huntsville
downclimbing in the Junction Room. After three un-
Cave Rescue Unit said that the actual rescue took
successful attempts to reduce the shoulder, Dickey
about one hour less than practice rescues and cred-
was given 800 mg of ibuprofen and treated for hypo-
its the rescue's success to the dedicated individual
thermia. Adams went deeper into the cave to get help
rescuers and teams and the cooperation between the
from the other group, Ling and Ling went to the sur-
Jackson County Rescue Squad, the Huntsville Cave
face to notify the surface watch of the problem and
Rescue Unit, and Chattanooga-Hamilton County
get extra warming supplies, and Vasko stayed with
Rescue Squad Cave and Cliff Team.
the patient.
group to arrive at Dickey. Mulder took charge and


********** 31 January 2016
assigned Adams as the medic. She immobilized
Dickey's arm and shoulder using webbing. In order
unspecified cave, Tennessee
to extricate the patient up multiple vertical pitches,
stranded, injury and aid
Mulder used techniques he had learned from two
National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) Small
Two men returned to a cave they had found pre-
Party Assisted Rescue (SPAR) courses he had recent-
viously in Cumberland Gap National Historic Park.
ly attended. He initially set up two counterweight
They brought along a rope purchased at Walmart,
systems to help Dickey up a 120-foot vertical section
and only one of the men entered the cave. Inside the
that was at a 45-degree angle. The group had a 100-
small entrance, the cave slopes downward at a 45-
foot rope, webbing, a Petzl Micro Traxion a mini
degree angle for about 60 feet before coming to a 15-
pulley, and extra carabiners to do the rigging. Jones
foot free hang. The man slid hand over hand down
served as the counterweight, and other team mem-
the rope to the bottom, but was unable to climb back
bers took turns assisting Dickey up the steep passag-
up. His friend eventually called National Park Ser-
es. Later, a traveling haul was used to get Dickey up
vice (NPS) Rangers.
a 12-foot pit, again using techniques from the SPAR
Claiborne County Rescue Squad, Bell County
course and the gear that team members had with
(Kentucky) Rescue Squad, and the NPS responded.
them. More ibuprofen was administered to relieve
The stranded man was located and placed in a har-
Dickey's pain, and the cavers observed that Dickey
ness. Rescuers used a 3:1 haul system with a belay
was showing signs of shock. At the entrance, a 1:1
to raise him to the surface. The man was mildly hy-
haul system was used. Mulder straddled the hole to
pothermic after spending five hours stranded in the
serve as the anchor, and he ended up reinjuring
cave. He also had rope burns on his hands. His only
torn meniscus in his left knee in the process. Dickey
gear was a headlamp. He was ticketed by the NPS.
exited the cave approximately four and a half hours
after his fall, hiked an hour to the trailhead, and was
1. Earl Pelfrey, Incident Report, 31 January 2016.
driven to the hospital.
2. Earl Pelfrey, phone communication, 1 February
2016.
1. Swede Larson, Incident Report, 7 February 2016.
2. Brian Dickey, Incident Report, 9 February 2016.
Comments: NPS at Cumberland Gap prohibits
3. Rodney Mulder, Incident Report, 10 February
unauthorized cave entry. One reason is to make sure
2016.
that those exploring caves in the park are doing SO
4. Debbie Spoons, e-mail communication, 29 Decem-
with proper experience and caving equipment.
ber 2016.


********** 16 February 2016
party skills, with eight other cavers to help, a mostly
Neffs Cave, Utah
vertical cave, and a patient who was ambulatory.
other (dislocated shoulder), injury, aid
The patient noted that the ibuprofen allowed him to
go from a pain level of 8 out of 10, when he wasn't
capable of doing anything, to a pain level of 5 or 6,
At approximately 1000, Rodney Mulder, Swede
which allowed him to move and help get himself out
Larson, Adam Jones, and Peter Hartley entered Nef-
of the cave.
fs Cave. At noon, a second group made up of Brian
Dickey (40), Kristin Adams, Ben Ling, Bryce Ling,
and Joseph Vasko, entered the cave. As noted previ-
ously in this publication, Neffs Cave is vertically rig-
orous, with nine drops requiring 690 feet of rope.
About an hour into the cave, having descended
about 150 feet, Dickey dislocated his shoulder while
American Caving Accidents
Mulder was the first person from the first cave
a
Comments: This was an ideal rescue for small

---------- Page 99 ----------
Entrance Gate
1:1 Haul
2:1 Bottom Haul
First Pit
2nd Counterweight
System
1st Counterweight
System
Junction Room
A diagram of the rescue systems used to extricate a caver with a dislocated shoulder
from Neffs Cave. Courtesy of Rodney Mulder and Bonny Armstrong.


********** 18 March 2016
Neversink, Alabama
stranded, aid, no injury
A group of rock climbers went to Neversink to
rappel into the 162-foot-deep pit and then climb out.
One man began to rappel using an ATC belay device.
Twenty feet down, he realized that neither he, nor
anyone in his group, would be able to climb out, SO
he continued rappelling to the bottom. His friends at
the top called 911. A local caver was contacted and
was able to reach the stranded climber and supply
him with mechanical ascenders. After a little bit of
instruction, the man was able to ascend out.
1. Aaron Polsky, Facebook post, 18 March 2016.
Comments: After repeated requests, the ACA
editor was not able to obtain any more information
on this incident. It would be interesting to know what
mechanism was in place that allowed a local caver to
be contacted and to respond to this incident.


********** 26 March 2016
Ellisons Cave, Georgia
difficulty on rope, injury and aid
A 22-year-old man was rescued from Ellisons
Cave after he was unable to climb out of Fantastic Pit
(586 feet deep). The man apparently ascended about
100 feet up the rope but was unable to continue fur-
ther. According to reports, this was due to some com-
bination of him becoming ill or exhausted and de-
hydrated due to an inefficient climbing
system. His partner climbed up to him
Feet
and was able to perform a pickoff and
lower him back to the ground. The man's
friend then climbed out of Fantastic Pit
and the Warm Up Pit (125 feet deep) and
called for help.
Several rescue groups responded.
At Fantastic Pit, they found the rope used
by the two adventurers. It was rigged in
an unconventional location, placing the
rope in a waterfall, and it was severely
abraded where it bent over the lip of the
pit. (Some rescuers have speculated that
even if the patient had been able to climb
out, the rope probably would have sev-
ered completely from the additional use
of the second person).
The patient was found, severely hy-
pothermic, at the bottom of Fantastic Pit.
His hypothermia had progressed to the
point where he had begun removing his
clothes, a behavior known as paradoxical
undressing.
Rescuers dressed the patient, provided him with
food and water, and encouraged him to get up, walk,
and move until he warmed up. He was then placed in
a harness and raised up both drops with rescuers en-
couraging him to keep moving his limbs and to stay
awake. The rescue operation took about six hours.
1. Callie Starnes, "UPDATE: Man rescued in Ellison's
Cave on Pigeon Mountain," www.wrcbtv.com, 26
March 2016.
2. Based on interviews with rescuers, conducted by
Bonny Armstrong.
3. B. Wedin, L. Vanggaard, J. Hirvonen, "Paradoxi-
cal undressing" in fatal hypothermia," Journal of Fo-
rensic Sciences, volume 24, number 3, pages 543-53,
July 1979.
Comments: Paradoxical undressing has been
reported in cases of both moderate and severe hy-
pothermia. As the body loses heat, blood vessels
contract in order to keep heat near the body's core
and vital organs. Eventually, the muscles necessary
for vasoconstriction tire and relax. Warm blood then
flows back to the extremities, and patients may sud-
denly feel hot. With mental alertness already com-
promised, patients do not realize the folly of remov-
ing their clothes. One study suggests that up to 50%
of hypothermia fatalities displayed some degree of
paradoxical undressing. This patient is extremely
fortunate that he was young and physically fit and
that help arrived when it did.
According to reports, the two men were experi-
enced rock climbers but had no caving experience.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 100 ----------


********** 17 April 2016
Woman Cave, Arizona
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
Ray Keeler led a small group of cavers on a
weekend trip to place registers in several Tonto Na-
tional Forest caves. On Saturday, they placed regis-
ters in four horizontal caves. On Sunday, the group
went to a cave that can be entered either with a 15-
foot rappel or with a free-climbable bypass. With the
exception of Keeler, the group was new to vertical
work, and they chose to rappel in and ascend back
out for practice. Under Keeler's tutelage, the group
did well and had no problems.
The next cave they visited, Woman Cave, has a
A still-smiling Brooke Kubby displays her hair that was cut in order to
40-foot entrance rappel into a large room. Here, the
remove it from her rappel rack. Photo courtesy of Brooke Kubby.
group rigged an extra rope as a "safety rope." Brooke
Kubby (20) was the fourth person to rappel. About
10 feet down the drop, she realized that her hair had
been pulled into her rappel rack. She was able to stop
her rappel and call for help. Keeler pulled the second
rope up, tied a figure-8 knot on a bight, attached a
carabiner to the bight, and lowered it to Kubby. He
thought that if she could attach the carabiner to her
to be rescued when he was unable to negotiate a tight
harness's D-ring, he could pull up and take tension
section in Rats Nest Cave. Canmore Cave Tours led a
off of the main line. Kubby, however, was not able to
group into the cave at 1300. Around 1600, the group
attach the carabiner to her harness.
came to one of the highlights of the cave tour, a pas-
Keeler then rappelled down and attached his
sage known as the Laundry Chute. A narrow, down-
quick attachment safety (QAS) tether to Kubby's har-
ward sloping passage accessed by a tight, 90-degree
ness and the QAS to the mainline above her. This un-
bend, the Laundry Chute requires squeezing and
weighted the rack slightly. Keeler was able to pull
wriggling through constrictions either on your back
some of her hair out of the rack but had to resort to
or stomach. One of the tour group members success-
cutting the rest out, with Kubby's permission.
fully negotiated the bend and proceeded down the
Once her hair was free, Kubby and Keeler fin-
Laundry Chute, but he could not exit through the
ished the rappel. The group placed the register and
end of the tight passage. The guide tried for an hour
ascended out without further incident.
to help the man go back up the passage or move for-
ward, but eventually he had to leave the cave to call
1. Ray Keeler, Incident Report, 26 April 2016.
for additional help. The owner of the tour company
sent in more people to help but ultimately additional
Comments: Photos of Kubby taken on the morn-
resources were called. Officials responded from Ka-
ing of the incident show her hair pulled back into a
nanaskis Country Public Safety, Canmore Fire-Res-
barrette. Upon entering Woman Cave, cavers must
cue, Alberta/B. C. Cave Rescue Service, and Alberta
pass through a 3- by 2-foot gate which has some bars
Health Services.
sticking out into the opening. Although it is not tight,
care must be taken to work around the bars. It is pos-
rock and make the passage wider, but because of the
sible that her hair became caught while she was look-
small space, only one person was able to work at a
ing down to negotiate the gate and that she did not
time. After many hours of drilling and chiseling, the
realize it until rappelling a few feet further. Having a
man was able to walk out of the cave under his own
second rope allowed Keeler to offer assistance. When
power. Paramedics checked him for injuries and then
possible, cavers should consider using releasable
allowed him to drive home. He had been trapped for
contingency rigging that allows a stuck caver to be
14 hours.
lowered especially when training beginners.
1. Rachel Maclean, "Rat's Nest Cave rescue takes
place overnight to free man stuck on tour," www.
cbc.ca/news/canada 26 April 2016.
2. Colette Derworiz, "Tourist rescued from deep in-
side Alberta cave after being wedged between rocks
American Caving Accidents


********** 25 April 2016
Rats Nest Cave, Alberta, Canada
stranded, aid, no injury
A man on a guided, commercial cave tour had
Rescuers used various power tools to remove

---------- Page 101 ----------
for 13 hours," http://news.nationalpost.com/news/
canada, 27 April 2016.
3. Christian Stenner, "Submissions for American
Caving Accidents," 1 January 2017.
Comments: A stuck or stranded caver can be
in a life-threatening situation. In this case of a stuck
caver, there were several advantages leading to suc-
cessful rescue. For example, the passage in the cave
was not far from the entrance, the patient still had
enough room for movement to keep warm, and he
was accessible by rescuers from both sides.


********** 7 May 2016
Transect 80 Cave, British Columbia,
Canada
rockfall, injury, no aid
Five cavers were surveying the newly discov-
ered Transect 80 Cave. As Larry Henson (80) and
another caver worked ahead of the group, choosing
survey stations, the rest of the group heard "a tre-
mendous crash." Henson was reaching out to test a
handhold when the half-ton rock he grabbed came
sliding down the muddy slope, knocking him into
the opposite wall. The group found Henson stand-
ing, but visibly shaken. He left the cave under his
own power, assuring the others he would be all right
Cave rescuers work with a pneumatic chisel to free a trapped caver at the exit of the "Laundry Chute" in Rat's Nest Cave. Photo by Matt Mueller.
since they were not far from the entrance. The rest
carried on with the survey, but eventually went to
see how Henson was doing. He was bruised and
sore, but didn't think anything was broken.
1. Peter Curtis, "Transect 80 cave," The BC Caver,
volume 30, number 2, pages 4-7, Spring 2016.
Comments: Cavers traveling through virgin or
newly discovered cave must be extra cautious about
handholds, footholds, loose rocks, and false floors.
Over time, as dozens to hundreds of cavers travel a
popular route, loose rocks get moved, weak holds
break off, and things on the walls and floors that can
collapse generally do. When one is exploring "new"
cave, the caver is in many cases the only thing that
has come along in thousands of years to upset the
balance of things. In some cases, large rocks may be
only precariously perched, just waiting for a caver to
come along and disturb the equilibrium.


********** 8 May 2016
unspecified cave, Kentucky
fatality, other (unknown)
A few hours after he was reported missing, An-
thony Wayne "Doc" Erisman (57) was found dead in
a cave. Friends of Erisman knew he enjoyed spend-
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 102 ----------
Safety Break #4
HYPOTHERMIA
Be careful of getting cold-even when it's hot outside. Caves take on the average yearly temperature
of the area in which they are located. Even caves located in warm tropical regions are usually cooler
than your body's temperature, which means that hypothermia can happen in almost any cave. Hypo-
thermia occurs when your body loses heat faster than it can produce heat. Fatigue, injury, and getting
lost or stuck can increase the risk of hypothermia. In a cave, everything around you will rob you of body
heat-including rock, water, and even the ambient air temperature.
Here are a few tips that can help ward off hypothermia:
Find a place out of water and away from windy passages. Sit on your pack to insulate yourself from
the ground.
Add warm, dry, clothing. If you're wet, try to change out of the wet clothing and put on something
dry.
Wool and synthetic fabrics dry faster than cotton, and wool maintains its thermal properties even
when wet.
Put on a hat. You lose heat everywhere, but your head is usually more exposed, even when wearing
a helmet. Wear a beanie under your helmet.
Keep a large trash bag in the space in your helmet or in a first aid kit. It might not feel very warm,
but putting a trash bag over yourself creates a vapor barrier to block wind and creates a smaller
air space you have to warm. (Be sure to tear a small hole to keep your head exposed.) Even better,
add a candle to create a heat tent, also known as a "Palmer Furnace."
Eat some food. Calories are potential energy, which are needed to generate body heat.
Hydrate. Drinking water isn't appealing when you're cold- but it is essential. Trying to stay warm
takes energy, and if you don't drink water, then dehydration will soon be an additional problem.
ing time in a particular Wayne County cave and soon
ing passing a rebelay with the rescuer suspended
discovered some of the man's belongings near the
just below the patient and operating descenders on
cave entrance. As they looked further into the cave,
the patient's harness. The fall occurred when a me-
they found bits of his clothing and eventually his
dium-sized rock that was being used as an anchor,
helmet and lights. Further into the cave, they found
was pulled out of place after the two-person load
Erisman's naked body. The body was removed from
was applied. The failure of this anchor caused both
the cave and the coroner initially reported seeing no
students and the rock to fall down the near vertical
signs of trauma. The results of an autopsy have not
slope. An instructor (38) stationed near the anchor
been made public at this time.
saw the anchor rock fly by, and in an effort to slow or
deflect the rock, he instinctively grabbed the rope as
1. Phil Pendleton, "Questions remain after expe-
it was being pulled down the slope by the falling stu-
rienced spelunker found dead in Wayne County
dents. Initially after being pulled head first toward
cave," www.wkyt.com, 10 May 2016.
the drop, he let go at the last second, hitting his back
against a rock ledge about halfway down the slope.
All three sustained minor injuries consisting of cuts


********** 10 May 2016
and bruises, but based on a medical assessment by
Pettijohns Cave, Georgia
a physician in the group, none of the injuries were
life threatening or required immobilization. Two of
caver fall (3), injury, no aid
the three people involved were able to exit the cave
without assistance while the third person (who was
During in-cave exercises conducted in Pettijohns
essentially uninjured) remained with the other stu-
Cave as part of the NCRC's 2016 National Weeklong
dents to finish their training scenarios.
Seminar, two Level 3 students, both of which are ex-
perienced cavers (35 and 33), fell approximately 15
1. John Maddox, Incident Report, 2 June 2016.
feet while on rappel. The two students were practic-
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 103 ----------
Comments: The anchor had been inspected by
several people and had previously supported a sin-
gle person load about ten times prior to the accident.
The anchor failed shortly after being placed under a
two-person load. When the two cavers pushed out
from the wall with their legs, they changed not only
the force but the direction of loading on the anchor.
The fall zone was cleared moments before the inci-
dent occurred. This is a good reminder that anchors
of questionable integrity should always be backed
up or back-tied. Anchors must be re-evaluated when
the size or direction of load changes. Critical-point
anchors must be bombproof, and people should stay
out of the fall zone whenever possible.


********** 13 May 2016
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
caver fall, injury, no aid
Steve Davis (57) was observing the mock rescue
during the 2016 NCRC National Weeklong Train-
ing Seminar held in Mentone, Alabama. Davis said,
"I was in Tumbling Rock photographing one of the
stretchers being used in their mock rescue. Trying
to stay out of their way and move back in front of
the group, I slipped and fell about four feet, landing
on a sandy surface on top of the one football-sized
rock anywhere around. Normally I would have just
cussed at myself and got back up." But due to some
pain he was experiencing, Davis allowed the group
to unpackage the mock patient and package him into
the Ferno. He was carried from the cave by a large
group of instructors and students.
1. John Maddox, Incident Report, 2 June 2016.
Comments: In a large mock rescue, there can be
a lot of commotion, causing one to become distracted
and have an accident. Rescuers and others involved
must always look out for their own safety first. While
it's never good to get hurt in a cave, doing SO in the
middle of a large-scale mock rescue can lead to a rap-
id evacuation.


********** 20 May 2016
Gourdneck Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, no aid
A group of eight experienced women cavers en-
tered Gourdneck Cave for a recreational trip. At the
waterfall, Susan Williamson (60) volunteered to rig
a rope for the rest of the group to access upper pas-
sages. While climbing and simultaneously looking
for a rig point, Williamson slipped and fell about 25
feet. As she fell, she banged against the rock several
times but managed to land on her feet at the bottom.
A quick assessment found that her ear was badly cut,
but she was otherwise unhurt. The group left the cave
without further incident. Williamson was driven to
the hospital where she received seven stitches to her
left ear and was diagnosed with a vertebral avulsion
fracture.
1. Susan Williamson, Incident Report, 27 May 2016.
Comments: In her report, Williamson notes that
having the proper gear-helmet, sturdy boots, knee
pads, elbow pads, and a shorty-style wetsuit-proba-
bly helped reduce the extent of injury she sustained.


********** 26 May 2016
Hidden River Cave, Kentucky
flooding, aid, no injury
A group of geology students from Clemson Uni-
versity were taking part in guided tours of Hidden
River Cave. In the early afternoon, a thunderstorm
developed and dropped a large amount of rain in
the area. The cave began flooding while the students
and their guides were far underground. Two police
officers entered the cave to alert the groups about
the flooding and escort them out. The groups had al-
ready noticed the rising water, and they began mak-
ing their way toward the surface. Although the stu-
dents and guides were required to enter neck-deep
water, they continued moving, and everyone made it
out safely by 1645.
1. Lisa Autrey, "Hart County Tour Guide Recalls
Cave Rescue," http://wkms.org, 27 May 2016.
2. WHAS11 Staff, "Cave operator eyeing new safety
features after students trapped," www.whas11.com
28 May 2016.
Comments: In interviews with Hidden River
Cave tour guides, one guide said that Hidden Riv-
er Cave had adopted new safety procedures after
a tour group was trapped by floodwaters in March
2012. Those procedures include waiting in an area
that is elevated above expected flood levels. Waiting
for floodwaters to recede is often the best option in a
flood situation. In this incident, the guides decided to
continue out rather than wait.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 104 ----------


********** 5 June 2016
ers, and one of the reporting party made their way
Red Baron Cave, Utah
to the patient. They found her with the other caver
sitting and holding the patient's arm straight out to
caver fall, injury, no aid
her side.
Adam Haydock (38) and two others were enjoy-
evacuate her with her arm in an extended position.
ing their first visit to Red Baron Cave when Haydock
For 20 minutes, he had the patient attempt to reduce
found a side passage that looked interesting to pho-
the dislocation using the Stimson method. This was
tograph. The passage slopes steeply downward for
unsuccessful, but she could now put her arm down
about 30 feet, and he began making his way down.
by her side. Mirza called for a litter and an evacua-
Near the top, a handhold broke and Haydock began
tion team.
sliding out of control. He managed to slow his de-
scent just before reaching the bottom, but along the
tient was coaxed to slowly start moving toward the
way he cut his hand, knee, and leg. The hand lacera-
entrance with assistance. After about 45 minutes of
tion was bleeding profusely.
travel, they met the evacuation team, and the patient
Haydock took a few quick photos then began
was placed in the litter and carried out. She reached
climbing back up the slope. The climb was difficult
the surface at 0115 and was transported to a local
and his hand injury made it even more challenging.
hospital.
He cleaned his wounds with water and alcohol and
bandaged them. The others helped him as needed as
1. Anmar Mirza, Incident Report, 12 June 2016.
he exited the cave. After de-rigging, the three cavers
made their way down the mountain to their vehicles.
The hand laceration continued bleeding until he re-
moving toward the entrance reduced the distance
ceived ten stitches at the hospital.
rescuers had to carry her, the amount of time she
spent strapped in a litter, and the chance of her be-
1. Adam Haydock, Incident Report, 6 June 2016.
coming hypothermic. Area resources are highly
2. Adam Haydock, "Red Baron Cave, Utah," www.
trained and familiar with incidents in Buckner Cave
adamhaydock.blogspot.com 6 June 2016.
and thus were able to facilitate this carry-out rescue
with only 12 rescuers.
Comments: In his report, Haydock notes that
rigging a handline at the slope would have prevent-
ed this accident.


********** 11 June 2016
Buckner Cave, Indiana
caver fall, injury and aid
Little Bitterroot Canyon Ice Cave. One of the trip
At approximately 1530, a woman (31) slipped
participants, a 21-year-old volunteer firefighter, had
and fell a short distance, dislocating her right shoul-
some experience rappelling with a figure-8 device on
der. The woman and her group were approximately
cliffs, but this would be his first time rappelling in
1,500 feet into the cave at the junction of the Waterfall
a cave. Thorsen rigged the entrance drop and rap-
Passage and the South BS Passage, and the accident
pelled first. The novice caver rappelled next. As he
occurred as she was climbing down into the Water-
was partially down-climbing the pit, he let go of the
fall Passage. Two of her fellow cavers attempted to
rope with his brake hand. Passing over a ledge, he
find their way out while a third stayed with her. The
began to free fall when his weight transferred back
two people attempting to exit the cave became lost
to his rappel device. Thorsen shouted for him to grab
and eventually returned to the patient after several
the rope, which he did after a few seconds. He re-
hours. The person who had stayed with her left with
gained control of his rappel before hitting the bottom
one of the others to make a second attempt to exit.
of the 40-foot pit.
They finally reached the cave entrance at 2100.
Van Buren Township Fire Department (VBTFD)
en again went first. This time, he ran the bottom
was called to respond and they in turn called for lo-
of the rope through his Croll and stood just out of
cal cave-rescue specialists. Rescuers were on scene by
the fall zone, ready to provide a bottom belay if his
2200, and the VBTFD asked local caver Anmar Mirza
buddy had trouble again. An almost identical situa-
to run the operation. As a team began running com-
tion occurred again as the man passed a ledge and
munication lines into the cave, Mirza, two other cav-
momentarily lost control. As Thorsen was starting to
American Caving Accidents
Mirza determined it would not be possible to
While waiting for the evacuation team, the pa-
Comments: Encouraging the patient to begin


********** 11 June 2016
Little Bitterroot Canyon Ice Cave,
Montana
lost control on rappel, no injury, no aid
Cliff Thorsen led two other cavers on a trip to
At the next drop, also about 40 feet deep, Thors-

---------- Page 105 ----------
provide a bottom belay, however, the novice caver
again regained control and rappelled safely to the
bottom.
1. Cliff Thorsen, personal communication, 15 Octo-
ber 2016.
2. Cliff Thorsen, Incident Report, 14 February 2017.
Comments: After the first incident, Thorsen in-
structed his friend in better use of the figure-8 device,
including keeping his non-braking hand below the
device and holding the rope against the attaching car-
abiner (during the first rappel, his non-braking hand
was on the rope above the rappel device). Thorsen
also rigged a secondary rope at the second drop as
a precaution. It is generally preferable to practice
single-rope technique (SRT) skills for the first time in
a controlled environment outside of a cave. Also, fig-
ure-8 devices have largely fallen out of favor among
cavers. A figure-8 on a cave trip may imply that the
user is less experienced. Less experienced cavers re-
quire more supervision and coaching. Contingency
rigging and bottom belays can add extra layers of
safety when applicable.


********** 2 July 2016
Raccoon Mountain Caverns, Tennessee
caver fall, injury and aid
A woman on a wild cave tour fell and dislocated
her elbow. Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue
Safety Break #5
PERSONAL FIRST-AID KITS
What's in your cave pack? Lights? Food and water? Clothing? What about a personal first-aid kit?
Experienced cavers tend to streamline their pack and lighten what they carry, and this sometimes
means taking out items that aren't frequently used but that can be worth their weight in gold when
they are needed. Many pre-packaged first aid kits have items that don't work well underground. In-
stead, consider building a custom first-aid kit that can fit in a Nalgene bottle or small Pelican™ case.
Sprains and breaks are among the mostly likely injuries underground, so cater to that type of injury.
Also, consider adding multipurpose items to your first-aid kit.
Duct tape can be used to cover small wounds or hold a splint in place, and a long, twisted strip of
tape can serve as a sling.
Extra plastic sandwich bags are also versatile. Fill a plastic bag with clean water and poke a small
hole to help irrigate a wound, or use it to cover bandages so they stay dry and mud-free.
Bandanas have many uses.
Include some protective gloves, sample packs of Neosporin, and a few dosages of over-the-counter
drugs like ibuprofen or Imodium, and you're on your way to having a well-supplied first-aid kit.
Services responded and carried her out of the cave.
No other information was provided.
1. WTVC staff, "Cave rescue at Raccoon Mountain
this past weekend," http://newschannel9.com, 5 July
2016.


********** 6 July 2016
Laurel Caverns, Pennsylvania
caver fall, injury and aid
Three cavers entered Laurel Caverns with a spe-
cial permit for a photography trip. While in a section
of the cave known as the Ball Room, one of the cavers
(42) slipped and fell. She landed in a way that caused
a rock to hit her on the head, just below her helmet,
and she lost consciousness for about 20 seconds. Her
companions completed a medical assessment and
contacted cave staff for assistance. The woman reported
feeling nauseated but was able to make it out of the cave
with minimal assistance. She was driven to a hospital
where she was diagnosed with a minor concussion.
1. Ryan Maurer, Incident Report, 6 July 2016.
Comments: The woman was relatively new to
caving. The reporting party said it was a simple ac-
cident that could have happened to anyone, despite
their experience level.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 106 ----------


********** 8 July 2016
Upana Cave, British Columbia, Canada
caver fall, injury, no aid
On 8 July, Alberta-British Columbia Cave Res-
cue volunteers were engaged in a mock rescue in
endipity Pit to rappel the cave's 40-foot entrance pit
Upana Cave as part of an 80-hour training seminar.
and the 110-foot pit inside the cave. They rigged the
During the exercise, a cave rescue volunteer slipped
entrance pit by tying an 11-mm rope around a tree
from standing height on a slope; she sustained a
using a bowline knot. They rappelled the entrance
muscle injury in her back, but she continued to work
pit, rigged the next drop, and rappelled it. They then
as part of the exercise. Two to three hours later, she
climbed out, derigging as they went. They made the
slipped again while on an evacuation team and ag-
short walk back to Wyatt's Jeep, loaded their gear,
gravated her injury. A short time later, she began to
and began to drive away. When they pulled out onto
experience intense pain.
the road, Wyatt was surprised to see his low fuel in-
A warming shelter was constructed at the com-
dicator light come on. He suspected his gas had been
mand post, and the injured volunteer was carried
siphoned.
there on a stretcher. She was initially attended by a
medic and another volunteer, but eventually she was
Wyatt noticed a problem with his rope. According
driven to a medical facility and examined by a physi-
to Wyatt, the rope "had been cleanly and purposely
cian. The volunteer rested throughout the next day of
sliced, twice, about three inches apart, both slices to
training and rejoined the group for the final seminar
the core of the rope. The cuts were made about four
debriefing on the morning of 10 July. She reported
feet from the end and would have been the part of
that her condition was steadily improving and she
the rope that was actually on the tree. I have zero
continued medical treatment upon her return home.
doubt that the rope was vandalized while we were
both in the pit." In his report, Wyatt mentions that he
1. Doug Munroe, Incident Report, 9 August 2016.
and others have previously seen evidence of illegal
activities in the area and warns others to be careful
Comments: Fatigue and poor footing due to
when caving in the Dorton Knob area of Cumberland
heavy rain were likely contributing factors.
County.
1. Warren Wyatt, Incident Report, 6 December 2016.


********** 9 July 2016
Portage Valley Ice Cave, Alaska
trapped, injury and aid
sue with entrance ropes being cut while cavers were
underground. Be careful out there!
An Anchorage man (21) was injured when a slab
of ice fell on him as he explored a popular ice cave
near Girdwood, Alaska. Other hikers at the cave used
rocks to chip away at the ice trapping him. Girdwood
Fire Department responded and assisted the man in
hiking out of the canyon. He was then transported to
a local medical facility.
Bridge State Park following a rain storm. Two men
1. Alaska Native News, "Anchorage Man Rescued
entered the cave while a companion waited at the en-
After becoming Trapped in Portage Valley Ice
trance. During their visit, water in the cave continued
Cave," http://alaska-native-news.com, 10 July 2016.
to rise, eventually trapping the men inside. At 2020,
2. Chris Klint, "Falling ice traps man inside Portage
their companion called 911 and several agencies re-
Valley ice cave," www.adn.com, 14 July 2016.
sponded. One man was rescued at approximately
2230 and the other three hours later. No other infor-
Comments: Entering a cave with ice overhead is
mation was provided.
always a risky undertaking. Doing SO during warm
temperatures may increase the risk.
1. M.P. White, "Spelunkers rescued from cave at
Rock Bridge State Park," www.columbiamissourian.
com, 14 July 2016.
2. Scott Christenson, e-mail communication, 19
December 2016.
American Caving Accidents


********** 12 July 2016
Serendipity Pit, Tennessee
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
Warren Wyatt and Kathie Ferrari visited Ser-
When he returned home and unloaded his gear,
Comments: This is the second incident in this is-


********** 13 July 2016
Conner Cave, Missouri
flooding, aid, no injury
Three people visited Conner Cave in Rock

---------- Page 107 ----------
Comments: Predicting when a cave will flood
can be difficult. Caves may flood during a storm or
hours to days after. All cavers can benefit from a ba-
sic understanding of cave and karst hydrology.


********** 21 July 2016
unspecified cave, Minnesota
stranded, injury and aid
Two people became stranded in a cave for sev-
eral hours when their only light source went out.
The couple had visited the cave with another friend,
who had remained outside of the cave entrance. The
couple entered the cave with one cell phone flash-
light. When the phone's battery died, the two sat in
one place until help arrived. Their friend eventu-
ally became worried and called 911. Rescuers found
the couple and escorted them out of the cave. The
man was unhurt; the woman had a laceration to her
hand.
1. Dave Aeikens, Matt Belanger, "Crews Rescue 2
People from St. Paul Cave," http://kstp.com, 21 July
2016.
2. KARE 11 Staff, "2 rescued from St. Paul cave,"
www.kare11.com, 21 July 2016.
Comments: Several people have been rescued
from the small caves in this area over the years. The
city of St. Paul is considering sealing the caves and
ticketing trespassers.


********** 29 July 2016
unspecified cave, Jamaica
3 fatalities, bad air
Four Jamaican men, ages between 36 and 48,
went into a cave in St. Catherine to collect water for
their crops. The men did not realize that the pump
system they were using was emitting noxious fumes.
Three of the men died while working in the cave; the
fourth man made it out and needed hospitalization.
The men's bodies were recovered the next day.
1. "Cops search for 3 men trapped in St Catherine
cave," www.jamaicaobserver.com, 1 August 2016.
2. Tanesha Mundle, "Death in a cave: Search for
water leaves three farmers dead," www.jamaicaob-
server.com, 3 August 2016.
Comments: Combustion engines commonly
produce carbon monoxide and should not be run in-
side or near the entrances to caves unless absolutely
necessary then only with proper ventilation.


********** 30 July 2016
Simmons-Mingo Cave System,
West Virginia
stranded, no injury, no aid
A planned through trip from the Historic En-
trance to the Zarathustra Entrance in the Simmons-
Mingo Cave System took about 11 hours longer than
expected for four cavers. Before entering, the group
hiked to the Zarathustra Entrance. Everything at the
entrance looked normal, and the cavers could feel
the usual breeze issuing from the cave. They then en-
tered the Historic Entrance shortly before noon.
Eight hours later, the group reached the inside
of the Zarathustra Entrance and noticed more water
than usual dripping into the cave. Exiting from this
side is aided by a permanently rigged rope that can
be used as a handline to climb up a slope into the
bottom of the entrance opening. On this trip howev-
er, the cavers found that the small hole that the rope
hangs through was blocked with a rock choke.
The cavers did not want to disturb the rock pile
over their heads, and they could not continue up.
Their only option was to turn around and go out the
way they had come in. This backtracking added more
than 10 hours to their trip for which they had not pre-
pared. One member had water purification tablets
that enabled the cavers to drink from the cave stream
(which rose continuously during their trip), prevent-
ing dehydration. They emerged from the cave at 0700
the next morning.
1. Carl Pierce, "Simmons-Mingo Cave blocked inside
Zarathustra entrance," e-mail communication, 1
August 2016.
Comments: In his e-mail to local cavers, Carl
Pierce strongly suggests that cavers make sure the
Zarathustra Entrance is open before attempting a
through trip from the Historic Entrance. He con-
cludes, "The Simmons Mingo through trip between
the Historic and Zarathustra entrances is a lengthy,
complicated, demanding trip for many cavers, and
lack of physical, mental, and resource preparedness
for essentially having to do it twice could very easily
have a less fortunate result than our trip did."


********** 7 August 2016
unspecified cave, New York
other (overdue), aid, no injury
As he was leaving home to go explore a cave
with friends on a Saturday evening, a Bethlehem
man told his wife she should call the police if he
wasn't home by two o'clock in the morning. When
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 108 ----------
Safety Break #6
SURFACE WATCH or CALL-OUT PERSON
Surface watch or call-out person refers to a person outside of your caving party who knows
where you are and when to expect you out of the cave. This person can be a significant other,
family member, or fellow caver. Having a dependable surface watch can significantly reduce
delays in a rescue response if it's needed. The surface watch should know whom to call to initi-
ate a rescue in your area.
Things to consider telling your designated surface watch:
Use the real or most common name of the cave! Do not use a nickname that no one else
would recognize. You might call it "Cake Lady Pit," but does anyone else?
The location of the cave.
The names and contact information for other individuals on the trip.
Experience level of the group.
What the trip's objectives are such as surveying, bolt climbing, or pushing leads.
A designated time to expect you out of the cave and a time to initiate a rescue.
Have a surface watch for every cave trip, no matter the trip length or difficulty. And don't for-
get to call them when you're out!
he wasn't home by the designated time, she called
with no one quite certain what to do. Eventually,
911. Police arrived at the cave just as one person was
somebody from Independence County Emergen-
coming out. That person informed the police that the
cy Services thought to call a friend, who is a caver.
others were on their way out also. Media reports did
Cavers began joining county officials at the cave by
not say why the group was overdue.
0200.
1. Joe Gullo, "No one injured in Carlisle cave res-
ing men before their turn-around time. The second
cue," http://news10.com/ 8 August 2016.
search team advanced 15 minutes farther and found
the students near Noisy Dome. They were cold, but
Comments: While we do not know what caused
their lights still worked and they were able to follow
the group to be late, this is an example of a surface
the cavers back to the surface after spending 30 hours
watch working exactly as planned.
in the cave. The senior student had somehow man-
aged to lose one shoe and one sock.


********** 10 August 2016
1. Brandon Labat, "Missing Students found SAFE,"
http://abc7chicago.com, 11 August 2016.
Blowing Cave, Arkansas
2. "Arkansas College Students Survive 30 Hours
lost, aid, no injury
Trapped In Cave," http://abc7chicago.com, 12 Au-
gust 2016.
Three students from Arkansas State University
3. Dewayne Agin, e-mail communication, 12 August
had to sit and wait for rescue when they became lost
2016.
in Blowing Cave. A senior student led two first-year
students to Blowing Cave wearing only jeans, tennis
shoes, T-shirts, and a single headlamp each. They en-
cavers and agencies can help to speed response times
tered the cave late that morning, and by early eve-
in the event of an emergency. The local volunteer fire
ning they realized they were lost. The leader of the
department attended an NCRC training in early 2017,
group made the decision that they would simply sit
bringing cavers and responders together in a training
and wait for rescue. They sat back to back to try and
environment to prepare together for the future.
share body heat.
When the students were not out of the cave by
midnight, the group leader's wife called 911. The call
was routed through various Emergency Services,
American Caving Accidents
The first search team did not find the miss-
Comments: Pre-planning for cave rescue among

---------- Page 109 ----------


********** 17 August 2016
unspecified cave, Tennessee
fatality, other (unknown)
A man (23) was found dead, submerged in wa-
ter in a cave that is popular with the local commu-
nity. The man's family reported him missing four
days earlier and had been looking for him. His father
found him in the cave.
An autopsy was not made public, but this likely
was not an accident resulting from regular caving ac-
tivities.
1. Najahe Sherman, "Man found dead, submerged in
water at Cheatham County cave," http://wkrn.com/
17 August 2016.
2. Tim Adkins, "Body found inside cave in Pleasant
View," www.tennessean.com, 18 August 2016.


********** 3 September 2016
Carpenter-Swago Cave System,
West Virginia
lost, aid, no injury
During the 2016 Old-Timers Reunion (OTR) in
Dailey, West Virginia, five cavers decided to do a
through trip in the Carpenter-Swago Cave System.
The trip leader knew the cave had been closed by the
landowner, but decided to proceed anyway. He had
led through trips in the system previously when the
cave was open.
In his report, the trip leader describes the cave
system, "Swago is a wet cave with four waterfalls.
The first is an open-air pit with a small waterfall
which is traditionally rigged off of a tree. The other
three waterfalls are situated along a stream passage
inside the cave. The bottom of the fourth waterfall is
the junction between Carpenter and Swago. Carpen-
ter has a series of three drops. The first is also located
in an open-air pit; it is rigged utilizing fixed bolts. The
next two drops are inside the cave. All three drops
are close enough SO that they can be rigged with a
single 300-foot rope. Beyond the third drop, the cave
is horizontal."
The group planned to travel from the Swago
Entrance to the Carpenter Entrance, SO the Carpenter
side had to be rigged first. The trip leader continues,
"The plan was to rig the rope on the first and second
drops, but not the third. On all the previous through
trips I had done, we used a bypass crawl that brought
us to the bottom of the second drop, without hav-
ing to first climb up the third drop. Our plan was to
make use of that bypass crawl on this trip, as well."
At the Swago Entrance, they rigged to a tree for the
first drop and carried a second rope that would be
Members of the Cushman Volunteer Fire Department and Arkansas No-
mads participate in a cave rescue training alongside local cavers. Photo
by Michael Patton.
pulled down behind them on the next three pitches.
The cavers, intending to travel quickly, carried packs
with minimal food, water, and emergency supplies.
Everyone rappelled the first drop without incident.
They traveled a short distance to the second drop.
Once everyone was down, they pulled the rope
down, committing themselves to continuing through
the cave to the Carpenter Entrance. When the rope
came down, they realized that they had left two
packs at the top of the pit. One of the packs belonged
to the trip leader and contained webbing that was to
be used for handlines and his ascenders, which he
had chosen not to wear while rappelling. The cavers
had no choice but to continue on.
When they reached the area of the bypass crawl
that would lead them to the Carpenter entrance, the
trip leader scouted ahead. The crawl looked smaller
than he remembered SO he sent one of the other cav-
ers in to check. That caver, which had never been in
this cave before, returned to say that the crawl did
not look safe and probably wasn't the way (it was, in
fact, the correct route). The group spent the next 12
hours looking for the way on. By now they were cold
and almost out of food and water. They traveled back
to the bottom of the last drop in Swago and waited
for rescue.
The group discussed how long it might take for
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 110 ----------
anyone from OTR to notice they were missing. They
systems. He was then carried in a litter to a helicopter
realized they had not established a surface watch and
and flown to a hospital in Burlington, Vermont, to be
probably wouldn't be missed until the next morning.
treated for head injuries.
They were correct; help did not arrive until 1300 the
next day. Chris Beauchamp and Peter Welles were
1. David Figura, "Injured cave explorer, lost hunter:
the first to make contact with the group and supplied
Adirondack Ranger rescues," www.newyorkup-
them with hot coffee, food, water, and extra clothing
state.com, 28 September 2016.
layers. Welles exited the cave to notify rescuers on the
2. Thom Engle, e-mail communication, 28 Septem-
surface that everyone had been found. Beauchamp
ber 2016.
led the group toward the Carpenter side. Since the
3. Chuck Porter, e-mail communication, 13 Novem-
rescuers did not know about the bypass crawl, they
ber 2016.
had rigged the third drop. Other than having to pass
ascenders down to the trip leader everyone climbed
out without incident.
with the rescue operation, and no other information
is available. We may assume the head injury was due
1. Jacob Kirk, "Carpenter-Swago Trip Report," 4
to a fall, but this cannot be confirmed.
September 2016.
Comments: In his report, the trip leader thanked
the rescuers and apologized to the caving commu-
nity and the landowner, who did not press charges.
He concludes, "We learned a lot of lessons on this
trip, and have since had plenty of time to think about
what went wrong-both in the cave and out of the
cave. Here are a few of the key points. First and
Northern Rocky Mountain Grotto, took place over
foremost, you never go into a cave (even if it's easy
three days in October 2016. The first two days were
and you know it well) without a solid call-out plan.
devoted to a series of workshops to train new cav-
People knew where we were, but no one had been
ers, and enhance the skills of experienced cavers, in
given an official time for our return. If we had a better
vertical caving, surveying, cartography, cave pho-
call-out plan, we would have been rescued in half the
tography, rescue techniques, and more. On the final
time. We learned that you just don't go into closed
day, everyone pitched in to clean up the camp before
caves, whether you think one quick trip would be
breaking into various groups to go caving. Chris Rost
OK or not. The harm done to the caving community
and Steven Rehbien led 12 other cavers to Lillyguard
simply isn't worth it (whether you, ultimately, need
Cave, a horizontal cave appropriate for beginners.
to be rescued or not). Always bring extra food, warm-
ing layers, etc., and never leave your pack behind.
(44) was noticeably slower than the rest, and the trip
Always carry a map of the cave, if one is available.
leaders made note of this. At the cave, the trip leaders
If we had a good copy of the map, we would have
reminded her that the trip into the cave would be all
known if we were in the right area and would have
downhill, which meant exiting the cave uphill would
pushed that crawl."
be more strenuous, and she would need to pace her-
self.
This is the second reported incident in just over
a month where a team planned for a quick through
cavers decided to turn around. Rost led those cavers
trip and was not able to complete the through trip.
Plan to have enough food, water, and warmth for
to the surface, while the female continued with Reh-
bien and the others to the back of the cave. The cav-
Plan B if Plan A becomes impossible for any reason.
ers on the surface waited for the others, who began
to exit the cave within an hour. The female said she
felt tired, and the leaders attributed this to her physi-


********** 21 September 2016
cal condition and the fact that this was only her sec-
Eagle Cave, New York
ond cave trip. Hiking back to their vehicles, she fell
other (unknown), injury and aid
to the back of the group, SO Lee Brooks walked with
her while the others went ahead. When Brooks and
Eagle Cave is a fissure cave popular with hikers
the female failed to join the group, Rost went back to
and novice cavers. Around noon on 21 September,
check on them. He didn't go far before he found the
authorities received a call that a caver (24) had been
two; the female was exhausted and needed a break.
injured and needed help. Rangers from the New
Rost, a physician assistant, did a medical assessment.
York Department of Environmental Conservation re-
She reported being light headed, her hands felt tin-
sponded and removed the injured man using haul
gly, she was cold, she hadn't eaten for eight hours,
American Caving Accidents
Comments: Cavers were not called to assist


********** 16 October 2016
Lillyguard Cave, Montana
exhaustion, aid, no injury
The first annual Cave Camp, hosted by the
During the half-mile hike to the cave, one female
Halfway to the bottom of the cave, three other

---------- Page 111 ----------
Montana cavers in a remote location loading an ill caver into the back of a pickup. They drove out of the mountains and met the ambulance en route.
Photo courtesy of Chris Rost.
was on several prescription medications, and had
drunk very little water. Over the next few minutes,
the patient became less responsive and eventually
lost consciousness. Rost sent Brooks to drive to where
he could get a cell phone signal and call 911.
The cavers who had been waiting at the vehicles
came to assist. They dressed the patient in dry cloth-
ing, laid her on a Therm-a-rest® pad, and covered
her in sleeping bags. They placed her in the back of
a pickup truck, and Rost and James Everett (an ad-
vanced EMT) attended to her while they drove out
of the mountains. The cavers eventually met the ap-
proaching ambulance and transferred the patient to
EMS care. The ambulance drove her to a waiting he-
licopter and she was flown to Great Falls. She was
released six hours later.
1. Chris Rost, "Medical Emergency Incident Report:
Lillyguard Cave, Stanford MT 10/16/2016," 21 Octo-
ber 2016.
2. Chris Rost, e-mail communication, 21 October
2016.
Comments: The woman was incapable of as-
sessing her own ability to go on this cave trip, despite
knowing she was tired, dehydrated, hadn't eaten,
and was on medication. Cavers should be especially
vigilant for unprepared cavers at a weekend caving
event, as these events often cater to beginning cavers
with led trips and workshops. We should help set up
beginning cavers for success by making sure they are
eating, staying hydrated, and otherwise prepared for
the particular trip.


********** 28 October 2016
Waterfall Cave, Georgia
caver fall, injury and aid
A geologist visiting Waterfall Cave tried to get a
better look at the 100-foot-wide sinkhole by climbing
over the railing of a boardwalk that surrounds the pit.
In doing so, he landed on a steep, leaf-covered slope.
He lost his footing and, finding nothing to grab, slid
15 feet down the slope, slipped over the edge and fell
40 feet to the bottom.
The landowner's nephew witnessed the fall and
called 911. The first rescuer attempting to make his
way to the patient twisted his ankle and had to be
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 112 ----------
rescued from the pit before operations could contin-
of snow in one place. As the cavers ascended, they
ue. When rescuers reached the man, they first had to
had to pull the rope to the side to get around the
'dispatch' a water moccasin (Agkistrodon piscivorus)
snow. The youth was ascending out of the cave on
that was reportedly "as thick as a man's arm" and ap-
prusik knots and had difficulty when he reached the
proaching the patient. They then immobilized and
snow cone. The rope had cut its way into the snow
packaged the patient and raised him out of the pit.
and he was not able to pull it out. Cold water was
The geologist suffered numerous broken bones and,
also dripping on him and soaking his clothes. Brian
despite a shattered jaw, repeatedly told his rescuers,
Dickey, the youth's father, had already climbed out.
"Thank you, thank you, thank you."
He instructed his son to climb back down and get
off rope. After an attempt to redirect the rope failed,
1. Jordan Barela, "Grady County personnel rescue
Dickey joined his son at the bottom and found him
man after cave fall," www.moultrieobserver.com, 17
to be "showing signs of cold stress and perhaps mild
November 2016.
hypothermia, with strong shivering and emotional
2. Tevis Kouts, e-mail communication, 11 December
distress." He warmed his son using a large garbage
2016.
bag and a candle to create a heat tent, or "Palmer
Furnace." While others attended to the young man,
Comments: A rescuer's number-one priority
Dickey climbed out, rerigged the rope on the other
should be his own safety, because, as seen here, hav-
side of the entrance drop, and then returned to his
ing to rescue a rescuer can slow down the overall op-
son. When the youth was warm enough, he climbed
eration and put even more people at risk.
out using his father's mechanical ascenders. An older
brother rappelled back into the cave to return his
dad's vertical gear and the trip was completed with-


********** 29 October 2016
out further incident.
Twin Sinks, Utah
1. Brian Dickey, Incident Report, 30 October 2016.
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
Four adults and one youth (14) spent an after-
that he and one of the other adult cavers "had re-
noon exploring Twin Sinks in Cache County, Utah.
cently attended NCRC Level 1 training. This training
The entrance drop was rigged in a location that
helped [Dickey] recognize and quickly treat [his son]
placed the rope between a rock ceiling and a cone
to prevent his condition from escalating further. It
Safety Break #7
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ)
The AHJ is the public safety official that has responsibility for a specific area. Conveniently, in most
cases, they all have the same phone number, and that number is 911.
The actual entity may vary from state to state and locale to locale. These agencies may or may not actu-
ally take part in a cave rescue, but they will retain the responsibility.
Some examples of AHJ include:
State police
County sheriff
NPS park ranger
BLM manager
State game warden
State park ranger
Within city limits, possibly local services
The AHJ may then contact local cave rescue groups or individuals. A good relationship between the AHJ
and cavers can be established by training and practicing cave rescue techniques together.
American Caving Accidents
Comments: In his own analysis, Dickey states

---------- Page 113 ----------
also helped in keeping calm as the group formulated
a plan and put it into action."


********** 24 November 2016
Bloomington Cave, Utah
exhaustion, aid, no injury
A family's Thanksgiving outing to Blooming-
ton Cave proved to be too much for a man in his 50s.
After making his way deep into the cave, the man
became exhausted and asked his nephew to bring
back help. While other family members stayed with
the man, the nephew found his way out and called
911. When rescuers reached the man, they found he
was unhurt but very tired and nauseous. They en-
couraged him along, letting him take as many breaks
as he needed. As they neared the entrance, they used
a haul system to help him up a steep incline, but he
otherwise made it out under his own power. The res-
cue operation took 10 hours to complete.
1. Cody Blowers, "Man exploring Bloomington Cave
falls ill, nephew runs for help," www.stgeorgeutah.
com, 25 November 2016.
Comments: Caving can be very strenuous, over-
working muscles that do not often see use in everyday
life. This combined with poor physical conditioning,
dehydration, and poor nutrition make exhaustion an
ever-present possibility, even among experienced
cavers. With newer cavers, we should be even more
vigilant for signs of exhaustion. Several incidents in
this issue serve to illustrate that point.


********** 2 December 2016
Bisaro Anima, British Columbia, Canada
rockfall, injury, no aid
A group of experienced cavers traveled by he-
licopter to the remote Bisaro karst to conduct a sur-
vey trip in Bisaro Anima. An underground camp was
established at -1,150 feet for a multi-day stay. On 2
December, two cavers were exploring and rigging
pitches ahead of the others. Claire Gougeon (37) was
shuttling gear to assist her partner, who was rig-
ging a pitch and needing supplies. Along the way,
she came to an exposed climb that was the route she
previously used. Not wanting to do this climb again,
she elected to climb up and over large, but appar-
ently stable, boulders. When she pushed off of one
round boulder, it shifted and pinched her left middle
fingertip between the boulder and the rock wall be-
fore falling the rest of the way down the slope. She
experienced pain but continued caving to meet up
with her partner.
When she removed her glove, she found the
fingertip cut open three-fourths of the way around
starting from the base of the finger nail and bleeding
profusely. It was cleaned in some fast-moving water
nearby, but she and her partner otherwise had no
first-aid supplies with them. They met up with an-
other team and the finger was bandaged with gauze
and she kept it elevated. Gougeon, who is a nurse,
and another caver with emergency-medicine experi-
ence judged it to be a bad cut. They determined that
even to exit the cave and call in the helicopter would
not get her to the hospital in time to allow for stitch-
es.
The next day Gougeon decided to take an easy
day and exit the following day with the rest of the
group as originally scheduled. The group exited the
cave, flew out by helicopter, and Gougeon was driv-
en to a hospital for x-rays. The x-rays showed that the
middle finger tip bone was broken and in fact had
been crushed. She was given a tetanus shot and anti-
biotics and the injury was bandaged and left to heal.
On-going issues required a return visit and a second
opinion. On December 10, just over a week after the
initial injury, she went for emergency surgery and re-
ceived two pins and eight stitches to treat the injury.
1. Katie Graham, personal communication, 16 De-
cember 2016.
2. Claire Gougeon, phone communication, 23 De-
cember 2016.
Comments: It was likely a good call to stay in
place rather than try to evacuate after a full day of
activity. A first-aid kit that contains butterfly strips
or steri-strips can assist with deep cut injuries when
evacuation to medical aid is delayed. Short lengths
of VetRapTM, ACETM Bandages, or Gorilla® Tape are
easy to carry and can be invaluable when needing to
close, compress, and protect a wound in wilderness
(cave) environments.


********** 18 December 2016
Binkley Cave System, Indiana
flooding, aid, no injury
Seven cavers entered the Binkley Cave System
on a rainy December afternoon. The forecast at the
time predicted less than an inch of rain for the day.
Their survey destination was a several-hour trip into
the cave, to a section few cavers are familiar with.
They had left word with a surface watch that their
out time would be 0300.
When the cavers reached a section known as the
D&B Crawl, they encountered standing water in the
crawlway with low air space. One of the cavers did
not want to go through the crawl, SO the cavers had
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 114 ----------
a discussion about splitting into two groups. As they
need the additional logistical load." At 0400, the rain
were deciding who would go with which group, one
stopped, but the cavers had not appeared. A gauge at
of the cavers mentioned that the water seemed dif-
Indiana Caverns, the commercial portion of the Bin-
ferent. Within minutes the water level was noticeably
kley Cave System, showed that the area had received
higher, and the cavers quickly retreated back the way
more than four inches of rain. By 0630 the next morn-
they had come.
ing, the level of the cave's river was 4 to 5 feet above
At 2030, long before their out time, the land-
the usual low-water levels.
owner contacted Anmar Mirza, a local caver and the
National Coordinator for NCRC. He was concerned
ter levels were rising. They began making their way
about the amount of rain (by then more than two
toward the entrance but were stopped by the river
inches had fallen and it was still raining) and the
near Fantastic Avenue. The river that had been a
level of the river in the cave. Mirza was familiar with
mere trickle on the way in was now more than five
every member of the caving team and knew them to
feet deep with a current too strong to enter safely.
all be strong and experienced cavers. He also knew
The cavers found a safe place to camp and wait out
that the cavers had entered the cave not knowing the
the flood. At 0600, they thought the water was low
storm had increased in strength. Mirza arranged for
enough to start making their way out, but despite
a gauge to be placed in the cave stream to monitor
their best efforts, they were forced to return to their
water levels. As a precaution, he began to notify lo-
camp.
cal cavers and asked them to be on standby. Mirza
explains, "I limited the number of people I put on
Mirza decided it was time to start a rescue. He first
standby to allow people to get a good night's sleep
contacted the Indiana Department of Natural Re-
and to limit the number of people who felt compelled
sources (IDNR), as they were the authority having
to go to the scene in spite of the fact that there was
jurisdiction. The IDNR Conservation Officers have
nothing that could be done. Temperatures that night
also been proactive in getting cave-rescue training
were going to fall to below freezing, and we did not
and have a good working relationship with Indiana
Anmar Mirza stands outside the entrance of the Binkley Cave System, waiting for the return of seven overdue cavers. Photo by Jerry Lewis.
American Caving Accidents
Underground, the cavers had realized that wa-
When the cavers still had not exited by 0930,

---------- Page 115 ----------
cavers. The IDNR then contacted other local authori-
ties. The biggest logistical problems now facing the
rescue operation were the freezing temperatures out-
side and the lack of cavers familiar with the route to
the missing cavers' destination.
The first initial response teams (IRT) entered
the cave at 1310 carrying extra food and hypotherm-
ia supplies. From Mirza's report, "IRT 1 was three
people, one of which was familiar with the in-cave
crew's objective. Their objective was to head to the
point furthest in the cave that would hamper the
in-cave crew's exiting due to high water, the D&B
Crawl, and report back on the conditions by 2300. IRT
2 was two people, both strong cavers but less familiar
with the cave, and their objective was to accompany
IRT 1 to the Mountain Room, which we considered
a high probability for a location for the in-cave crew
to be holed up, then split off and report back by 1700
which would give us guidance planning for the next
operational period."
At 1730, IRT 1 made contact with the cavers; they
had been waiting out the flood in Fantastic Avenue.
The team leader of IRT 1 and two of the missing cav-
ers exited the cave at 2250, reporting that everyone
was alive and well. The other members of IRT 1 were
following with the remaining cavers at a slower pace.
An evacuation team was sent in to assist and three
more cavers exited at 0240. The remaining two cavers
exited 15 minutes later.
1. Elizabeth Depompei, "RESCUE AT BINKLEY'S
CAVE: Community, multiple agencies work togeth-
er to free Corydon cavers," www.newsandtribune
com, 19 December 2016.
2. Roger Moon, "To the rescue: Former Bedford man
plays key role in saving seven trapped cavers," The
Herald Times, 22 December 2016.
3. Anmar Mirza, "Binkleys Cave rescue report," 22
December 2016.
4. Laura Demarest, "Binkley Cave Trip Report De-
cember 17-19th, 2016 - The 39-Hour Fugue State,"
24 December 2016.
Comments: The cavers were aware of rain in
the area, but decided to continue with the trip based
on an overall prediction of less than one inch in the
forecast. With the hindsight of knowing the final to-
tal was actually quadruple that, it is easy to question
the cavers' decision to continue. In fact, one planned
member of the team decided to sit out the trip based
on the uncertainty of the weather. However, the cav-
ers were making an informed decision based on the
best information they had at the time. Long cave sys-
tems can be especially unforgiving in the face of un-
certain weather. Besides typically having large catch-
ment areas for floodwaters, long caves can take many
hours to traverse. This trip was originally planned to
be nearly 20 hours long. Weather decisions have to
be made based on conditions and forecasts up to the
moment of entering, but conditions can change rap-
idly after the cavers are underground.
The rescue response worked smoothly and effi-
ciently. This is a result of years of training and prepa-
ration in the area that have resulted in cavers, res-
cuers, and landowners working together to achieve
positive rescue outcomes.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 116 ----------
2016 CAVE-DIVING ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS


********** 26 March 2016
tion, Young came to the conclusion that the cave had
Blue Hole, New Mexico
"walled out," meaning that it would not be possible
fatality, stuck
to go any farther and there was no longer any possi-
bility of continuing the exploration. When he started
Robert (Shane) Thompson (43) died while ex-
his return, he was surprised to find that Thompson
ploring the cave at the base of the Blue Hole in Santa
had gone past the second restriction, and the two met
Rosa as a member of the ADM Exploration Founda-
head on in the confining passage.
tion team led by Curt Bowen. The team was working
that week to explore and open the cave on behalf of
to turn around. Young went through the second re-
the city.
striction first and then helped Thompson get through
The cave had been closed for 40 years after the
by pulling on him. This resulted in the two of them
death of divers there. In closing the cave, the city had
being tightly wedged in opposite directions, necessi-
dumped tons of rocks into the opening, which made
tating a second challenging effort to get turned in the
navigation difficult and required that the team open
right direction. This effort caused some of the tie offs
new passages in addition to exploring them. It had
of their guideline to come loose, resulting in a loose
taken two previous visits over several years to open
guideline. This meant that, although the line would
the top portion, and the team was now working to
still ultimately be able to lead them out, it would not
expand their progress.
always be in the desired location. This caused what
The previous work had opened a narrow pas-
are called "line traps," when the line goes in places
sageway from the opening at a depth of 85 feet to a
too small for the diver to navigate. This happened in
tight restriction at a depth of 160 feet. As work pro-
several places during their exit. They also lost the line


********** gressed, the team divided into three groups: those ex-
several times and had to relocate it.
panding and clearing the upper portion, those work-
ing to enlarge the restriction at 160 feet, and those
point. He had the line and could feel vibration from
exploring the passages past the 160-foot restriction.
Shane being on the line. He assumed Thompson was
The team that was able to get past the 160-footre-
ahead of him. He crossed a secure tie off to get into
striction and continue the exploration was composed
an intact section of line, after which he no longer felt
of Mike Young and Shane Thompson. Young was us-
the vibration and knew that Thompson was instead
ing a sidemount rebreather system, and Thompson
behind him. He turned to head back, and as he was
was using a backmounted system. Young led, and
doing so, the vibrations stopped. When he found
Thompson provided support. They were working
Thompson, he was stuck in a restriction, and he was
in tight passages with loose rock and fine gray silt
already deceased.
that stirred easily, creating zero visibility. They en-
countered several passages that were dead ends, but
realized he could not, especially given the length of
they were able to find the main passage. As usual,
time he had already been at that depth. The body re-
they laid line to follow for their exits. During the ex-
covery was completed the next day. Because of the
ploration, they encountered two more severe restric-
restriction, it was necessary to remove the rebreather,
tions, and Young was better able to squeeze through
which was left in the cave. The cave has since been
them with his sidemount system. The second was at
sealed.
a depth of about 194 feet, and they progressed a few
feet past that.
1. Debbi Baker, "San Diego scuba diver dies in New
Because of the danger of working simultane-
Mexico underwater cave accident: Shane Thompson
ously in different sections of a nearly vertical shaft
became trapped in a cramped cavern and could not
filled with loose rocks, the team decided to have only
escape," www.sandiegouniontribune.com, 31 March
one group work at a time. On 26 March, the team
2016.
plan was for Young and Thompson to enter first and
2. Laura Bult, "Expert diver died after getting
then exit SO that the 160-foot team could work, af-
trapped overnight navigating the dangerous Blue
ter which the team doing the upper section would
Hole caverns in New Mexico: 'Everything went ter-
enter. Because of the difficulty Thompson had with
ribly wrong'," www.nydailynews.com, 2 April 2016.
the second restriction the previous day, the plan
3. John Adsit, Incident Report, 19 October 2016.
was for him to stay on the exit side of the restriction
while Young continued the exploration beyond that
alone. While exploring about 45 feet past that restric-
American Caving Accidents
After considerable effort, Thompson was able
Eventually Young believed they were at a safe
Young tried to get him out, but after a while he

---------- Page 117 ----------


********** 3 April 2016
Ginnie Springs, Florida
fatality, medical
Mike Schultz (61) of Ohio died of a heart attack
while diving in the Devil's System at Ginnie Springs
near High Springs, Florida, on 3 April. Schultz was a
highly experienced and trained diver using an Op-
tima Rebreather, for which he was certified.
Shultz and a dive buddy entered the system us-
ing Dive Propulsion Vehicles (scooters), which they
took into the cave for a distance of about 2,150 feet.
They then left their scooters, and swam to an area
called Sweet Surprise at a distance of about 3,100
feet. (When using a scooter, it is common to use it to
reach an area of the cave and then leave it to complete
the dive plan while swimming.) After their visit to the
planned area, they turned the dive, with Shultz follow-
ing his buddy back to their scooters SO they could exit.
During the exit, Shultz began to shows signs
of distress by having difficulty performing routine
skills. Shultz indicated he was having trouble man-
aging his scooter and wanted to swim instead, but
he had trouble swimming as well. His buddy began
to tow him out, but eventually there was a complete
loss of buoyancy leading to a silt out. At that time
a cave-diving instructor, Ted McCoy, encountered
them while teaching a class, and he attempted to as-
sist. Shortly after that it became evident that Shultz
was deceased, and a recovery team was formed to
recover the body.
An autopsy identified the cause of death as
drowning, and the event that precipitated the drown-
ing was a heart attack with a blocked coronary ar-
tery.
1. "Diver death at Ginnie 3-APR-2016", www.cave-
diver.net, 3 April 2016.
2. Brent Booth, personal communication, 25 October
2016.


********** 10 September 2016
Orange Grove Sink, Florida
fatality, cause unknown
A man died while diving in the Orange Grove
Sink at Peacock Springs State Park. A formal report
was not available, but the accident was likely caused
by the diver attempting a trip beyond his training
level. He followed another team's dive line, which
was removed while he was still in the cave.
1. "Accident at Orange Grove 9-10-16," www.cave-
diver.net, 10 September 2016.
Comments: Members of the Cave Diver's Fo-
rum have expressed a great deal of frustration over
the lack of reporting in cave-diving accidents. It is
impossible to learn any lessons if no one writes a re-
port.


********** 16 October 2016
Eagles Nest, Florida
2 fatalities, cause unknown
"The rescue divers were private volunteers because
the expertise necessary to retrieve the men exceeded the
authorities' abilities."
Three men visited Eagles Nest as part of a three-
day dive trip. The underwater cave is notorious
for its difficulty and at least eight people have died
while diving its depths. A sign at the entrance to the
cave proclaims, "STOP. PREVENT YOUR DEATH.
THERE'S NOTHING IN THIS CAVE WORTH DY-
ING FOR!" Patrick Peacock (53) and Chris Ritten-
meyer (38) were experienced cave divers and felt
confident about their ability to explore the cave.
Their friend, Justin Blakely, decided to stay closer to
the surface. They planned to meet up again in the af-
ternoon at 1500.
Peacock and Rittenmeyer did not show up at
the scheduled rendezvous time, SO Blakely waited
another 30 minutes, and then another 30 minutes. At
1800 there was still no sign of the missing divers, and
Blakely called 911. A search team did not initially
find the two men. The search was resumed the next
day, and the bodies of Peacock and Rittenmeyer were
found and removed from the cave.
1. Katie Mettler, "Stop. Prevent Your Death' Said
Sign at Florida Underwater Cave. These Expe-
rienced Divers Ignored It," www.ndtv.com, 18 Octo-
ber 2016.
2. Mike Clary, "Fort Lauderdale friends die cave-
diving in underwater spring where others have
perished," www.sun-sentinel.com, 18 October 2016.
Comments: Again, no report was published SO
there is very little that we can learn from this unfor-
tunate accident.


********** 27 November 2016
Sistema Sac Actun, Quintana Roo, Mexico
fatality, lost
Amy Maria Arriaga and her former cave diving
instructor, Alessandro Morano, planned a day of div-
ing together in Sistema Sac Actun. They discussed at
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 118 ----------
This sign, placed at the entrance of Eagles Nest, is intended to deter divers from entering this notoriously difficult underwater cave. Despite the
morbid message, many divers ignore the warning,and bothexperiencedandinexperienced divers have died within its depths. Photo by Andreas
Hagberg.
American Caving Accidents
STOP

---------- Page 119 ----------
length their dive plan of traveling through the cave
to the Cuzan Nah loop. Their starting and ending
point would be Grand Cenote. Their other objective
was for Morano to take video footage of Arriaga and
the cave. During most of the dive, the two stayed
close together with Arriaga leading, making note of
permanently placed markers and leaving their own
when their route deviated from the mainline. As they
approached No Name Cenote, Morano took pictures
of the light shining into the water. When he was done,
Arriaga was nowhere in sight.
He searched briefly, checking nearby cenotes
where she might have exited, but decided that she
must have gone on ahead of him. As he made his way
back to Grand Cenote, Morano picked up the mark-
ers and dive lines they had placed. At Grand Cenote,
he did not find Arriaga.
Morano went back into the cave and came
across another dive team. They communicated that
they had seen a solo diver fitting Arriaga's descrip-
tion near Cenote Ho-Tul (that team later noted that
Arriaga at the time did not show any signs of being
in distress). Morano did not find her there. By now,
he was running low on air, SO he left the cave to get
fresh tanks. There, he ran into the team he met un-
derwater and informed them of what had happened.
He then entered the cave again for another search,
replacing his markers as he went. Back in the Cuzan
Nah loop, he found Arriaga's body. Both of her tanks
were empty. He pulled her to the surface of a nearby
cenote where other divers tried to resuscitate her.
Morano swam her body back to Grand Cenote and
turned it over to waiting authorities.
1. Alessandro Morano, Incident Report, undated.
2. Ron Engle, Letter to IANTD, undated.
Comments: Morano lost track of Arriaga in the
Cuzan Nah loop. It is not known if she swam ahead
and accidentally started around the loop again, got
behind Morano and swam back the way they had
come, or had made her way ahead and gone beyond
the loop only to be confused by the second team's
dive line and SO turned back. Whatever happened, as
soon as Morano removed their jump lines and mark-
ers (because he assumed she was ahead of him), it
would have been almost impossible for her to find
her way out. Losing track of a dive buddy, and then
removing necessary markers before they are located,
is a breach of cave-diving protocol, and here it had
deadly consequences.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 120 ----------
2016 CAVING-RELATED ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS


********** 10 March 2016
the youths accidentally pulled a rock down on him-
Meramec Caverns, Missouri
self, trapping both boys. Eleven different agencies re-
bad air, no injury, no aid
sponded and rescued the boys in about three hours.
Meramec Caverns, a popular show cave near
1. Jerrika Insco, "Two teens rescued after being
U.S. Route 66, was closed for three months when the
trapped by fallen rock in cave," http://wlos.com/ 26
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) found
July 2016.
levels of trichloroethylene (TCE) vapors in the cave
to be above acceptable limits. TCE has been a prob-
lem in the cave since 2003, and the vapors are likely
from a nearby automotive parts plant or a landfill,
both of which are associated with a Superfund site.
Increased ventilation in the cave helped to reduce the
vapors to levels acceptable for employees. The EPA
states, "TCE is carcinogenic to humans by all routes
Idaho that has been a "family secret" for more than
of exposure."
40 years. In July 2016, during a family reunion, Dan
and Bret took some family members to show them
1. Ron Warnick, "Meramec Caverns may be closed
the cave. They arrived at the cave's pit entrance and
until mid-summer," www.route66news.com, 3
were surprised to hear a dog, whining in the pit, 25
April 2016.
feet below them.
2. Ron Warnick, "Meramec Caverns reopens today,"
www.route66news.com 10 June 2016.
found a very skinny hound dog. They placed the
dog in a pack, and she was hauled up by people on
Comments: Three months after closing, Mer-
the surface. The hound, whose name is Tinker, was
amec Caverns reopened to the public on June 10. The
learning to hunt bear in Idaho's Payette National For-
Superfund site in question is about four miles away.
est when her trainer lost the signal from her tracking
This incident highlights the ability of karst to trans-
collar. Having no idea the dog had fallen in a pit, the
port unfiltered pollutants over long distances.
trainer eventually gave up looking for her. Tinker
survived in the cave for two weeks before she was
found. She was eventually returned to her owner in


********** 8 July 2016
Montana.
unspecified sea cave, California
1. Kristin Rodine, "Dog has its day: Hound rescued
stranded, injury and aid
from bottom of a remote Idaho cave," www.idahos-
A man fell from cliffs into the ocean near the
tatesman.com, 1 August 2016.
Sutro Baths in San Francisco. He swam into a sea
2. Karen Lehr, "Treasure Valley family rescues dog
cave but was not able to get out. The San Francisco
trapped in secluded cave for extensive period of
Fire Department was able to raise the man back to
time," www.kivitv.com, 1 August 2016.
the top of the cliffs.
1. Jack Morse, "Man Rescued From Sutro Cave After
years that Dan and Bret had visited the cave; how
Falling From Cliffs," http://sfist.com, 8 July 2016.
very fortunate for Tinker.


********** 26 July 2016
unspecified cave, North Carolina
rock fall, injury and aid
During a rock-climbing trip with an outdoor
adventure group, two youths (13 and 16) took shel-
ter in a cave when the weather turned bad. One of
American Caving Accidents


********** 29 July 2016
unspecified cave, Idaho
dog rescued from cave
Brothers Dan and Bret Friend know of a cave in
The two brothers rappelled into the pit and
Comments: This was only the second time in 30

---------- Page 121 ----------
The Steve Hudson Award
for Service to Cave Rescue
Steve Hudson (NSS 11444 RL, FE, OS) was a founder of the National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC)
in the late 1970s and supported it through the next four decades. He served as one of its first instructors, as the
Southeastern Region coordinator, as the national coordinator, and as the training coordinator. Steve owned
and ran Pigeon Mountain Industries (PMI) and was an internationally acknowledged expert on rope and
rope rescue. He used his experience to raise standards and practice in industrial rope access as well. He was
a founder of the Society of Professional Rope Access Technicians (SPRAT) and an author of High Angle Rescue
Techniques. Steve served as Deputy Director of Emergency Services for Walker County, Georgia, and was a
recipient of its Distinguished Service Award. He was also the recipient of the International Technical Rescue's
Lifetime Achievement Award. Steve donated countless hours to teaching rescue techniques to make cavers
safer. Steve was taken from us prematurely in 2013 in Puerto Rico, a place he grew to love after traveling to
teach cave rescue there. In recognition of his lifetime of service, the National Speleological Society created the
Steve Hudson Award for Service to Cave Rescue.
In 2016, the NSS bestowed the inaugural Steve Hudson award on Diane Cousineau (NSS 9284 RL, FE,
SH). Diane completed her first NCRC training in 1986 and is now the lead instructor for the NCRC instructor
qualification course. She is the captain of Walker County Emergency Services Station 21, which is responsible
for cave, cliff, and ground search for the county. Her team also provides mutual aid for cave rescues in other
Georgia counties, as well as in Alabama and Tennessee, and has accomplished many successful rescues in
technically difficult caves, including Ellisons Cave. Diane was the 2015 recipient of her department's Distin-
guished Service Award.
To learn more about Steve and Diane, see the February 2003 issue of the NSS News, where they were
featured in the Spelean Spotlight.
CRYSTAL
Diane Cousineau and Steve Hudson in 2003. Photo courtesy of Diane Cousineau.
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 122 ----------
Contributors
Andy Armstrong, NSS 45993 RL, FE
Andy has been caving for 24 years and has specialized in survey expeditions involving backpacking and
underground camping, primarily in Lechuguilla Cave, Jewel Cave, and Grand Canyon National Park. He is
the Rocky Mountain Regional Coordinator for the NCRC and has served as an NCRC instructor since 2011.
Andy works as a Cave Resource Specialist for the National Park Service. Since 2008, he has been stationed at
Timpanogos Cave National Monument, where he also serves as park EMS and SAR coordinator.
Bonny Armstrong, NSS 43003 RL, FE
Bonny graduated from Western Michigan University with a Master's Degree in Geology. She has been the
editor of American Caving Accidents since 2011, and she served on the ACA review committee for several years
before that. An instructor for both the NCRC and the NSS Vertical Section, Bonny is committed to helping
others learn safe rope skills and basic cave rescue techniques, especially rope-rescue skills using minimal
gear. She has been employed by the U.S. National Park Service since 2005, and currently works in the Re-
source Management Division at Timpanogos Cave National Monument.
Gretchen Baker, NSS 50323 RL, FE
Gretchen has been caving for about 20 years and is an NCRC instructor. She helps to manage caves at Great
Basin National Park in Nevada. She's also a volunteer firefighter and EMT for White Pine County. She has
written non-fiction books about the Great Basin and writes caving mysteries under the pen name C.A. Cox.
Roger Brucker, NSS 1999 RL, HM, CM, CM, PH, AL, FE
Roger has been a caver since 1952, and as indicated by all those initials next to his name, has won many hon-
ors from the NSS, including Honorary Member. He is the author or coauthor of five books and numerous
articles, and he has presented hundreds of talks. He is coauthor with Robert K. Murray of Trapped! The Story
of Floyd Collins. Roger is a past president of the Cave Research Foundation and has taught Speleology for
Western Kentucky University for 25 years. He is retired and lives with his caver wife of 32 years, Lynn. He
and the late Joan Brucker have four adult children, including Tom Brucker.
Peter Buzzacott, PhD, NSS 64284 RL
Peter is a life member of the NSS and the Cave Diving Section (CDS) and a former member of a number of in-
ternational caving and cave diving associations, including in France and Australia, where he formerly lived,
caved, and dived before moving to the U.S. Peter has a Master of Public Health degree and a PhD in diving
injuries, has 50 scientific papers published on the topic of diving injuries, and around 200 diving magazine
feature articles on cave diving and diving safety. A former diving instructor with more than 500 certifica-
tions issued, Peter is an advanced cave diver and advanced trimix diver, certified in cave DPV (scooters),
rebreather diving, and an International Underwater Cave Rescue and Recovery (IUCRR) diver.
Thomas Evans, NSS 57831
Tom runs SAR³, a nonprofit organization that performs rigging research, reviews rigging literature, and pro-
vides teaching and learning aids for rope users. An avid ultralight backpacker, packrafter, caver, and cany-
oneer, Tom enjoys being outdoors and helping others be safer when they venture out as well. He volunteers
as an NCRC instructor and with local search and rescue whenever possible.
Curt Harler, NSS 22735 CL
Curt is the Executive Vice President of the NSS and a long-time member of the Cleveland Grotto where he
has held most of the key offices. Before that, he was a founding member of Tampa Bay Area Grotto and was
active in the York Grotto and Nittany Grotto. He is coeditor of the NSS's widely respected book Caving Basics.
When not caving, he works as a freelance writer specializing in security, agriculture, and environmental is-
sues. Curt is an avid mountaineer, caver, cross-country skier, and tennis player.
American Caving Accidents
Heber City, UT
Heber City, UT
Baker, NV
Beavercreek, OH
Durham, NC
Mountain View, CA
Strongsville, OH

---------- Page 123 ----------
Scott McCrea, NSS 40839 RL
Scott is owner of Swaygo Gear-manufacturer of innovative and ingenious caving gear. He is the Chairman
of the Safety and Techniques Committee of the NSS, an NCRC instructor, the NCRC sub-regional coordinator
of North Carolina, and level 1 SPRAT certified. He caves mostly in North Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia.
Roger Mortimer, MD, NSS 26529 RL, FE
Roger is a Clinical Professor with the University of California at San Francisco. He is an NCRC instructor and
the Western Region coordinator of the NCRC. He has taken his interest in caving and search and rescue and
turned it into research in wilderness medicine. He caves with the San Joaquin Valley Grotto and the Cave
Research Foundation. Roger has presented nationally on suspension trauma.
Don Paquette, NSS 8545 RL, FE, CM
Don started caving in 1961 and participated in his first rescue in 1963. He is one of the founders of the NCRC,
having served as the first Central Region Coordinator from 1978 through 1984 and from 1991 through 1994.
He was National Coordinator from 1984 through 1991. He served as NSS Executive Vice President from 2001
through 2004. He is attempting to be a retired technical writer and industrial training contractor.
John Punches, NSS 39211
John is an associate professor and administrator for Oregon State University. He has been an instructor for
the NCRC since 1996, has served as its National Coordinator and Pacific Northwest Regional Coordinator,
and is currently its Training Coordinator. John has contributed to National Park Service rescue plans for
Lechuguilla, Wind, and Jewel caves. He is also the long-time training officer for the Douglas County Moun-
tain Rescue Unit (Oregon), with expertise in cliff, cave, and alpine rescue. He has extensive experience in
search management in Oregon and the eastern U.S.
Dean H. Snyder, NSS 17870 RL, PH, FE
Dean started caving in 1973 and is a founding member of the Greater Allentown Grotto. He is currently the
president of the American Spelean History Association. Much of his underground time today is spent in cave
conservation.
Christian Stenner, NSS 61663
Christian has been caving since 2004 and has contributed to expedition projects in Canada, the USA, and
Mexico, mostly with the Alberta Speleological Society. Since 2008, he has volunteered with Alberta/Brit-
ish Columbia Cave Rescue, where he was a Regional Coordinator and Training Director prior to becoming
the Alberta Provincial Coordinator in 2014. Additionally, Christian is a Senior Advisor in the Environment,
Health, and Safety Division of a large North American energy company, where he has managed corporate
emergency incidents. He holds a certificate in management with specialization in risk management and is
an instructor, facilitator, and sought-after presenter in various subjects. He also serves as a captain in the
Canadian Armed Forces reserve, instructing cadets and staff in expedition programs, outdoor leadership,
and risk management.
Tom Wood, NSS 65725
Tom is the Technical Department Manager for Pigeon Mountain Industries (PMI) Vertical Rescue Solutions
and a 19-year veteran of the Alpine Rescue Team in Evergreen, Colorado. He is a Level 3 SPRAT Rope Access
Supervisor and serves as the Terrestrial Rescue Delegate to the International Commission for Alpine Rescue
(ICAR) on behalf of the Mountain Rescue Association. He is an NCRC-trained cave rescuer and writer who
has contributed to High Angle Rope Rescue Techniques, 4th Edition, and Professional Rope Access: A Guide to
Working Safely at Height. His memoir, Trading Steel for Stone, Tales of a Rustbelt Refugee Turned Rocky Mountain
Rescuer, was published in 2016.
Asheville, NC
Fresno, CA
Martinsville, IN
Roseburg, OR
Schnecksville, PA
Calgary, AB
Conifer, CO
American Caving Accidents

---------- Page 124 ----------
If it happens to you
will YOU know what to do?
Accidents can
happen to anyone.
Training improves
the outcome.
CAVE
RESCUE
ncrc.info

---------- Page 126 ----------
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS
50TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION
10 feet to
hole in floor;
14 feet total
Compiling and analyzing caving incidents across North America for
half a century, American Caving Accidents is the journal of record
for what can go wrong underground, how to prevent caving accidents,
and how to respond in an emergency. ACA informs the decisions of
thousands of cavers as they venture into some of the world's most
remote places.
Inside this special 50th anniversary edition, you will find:
Feature articles on caving safety, cave rescue history, and more
Accident and incident reports and analysis (2015-2016)
Fifty years of caving incident statistics (1967-2016)
Safety tips and techniques
A publication of the National Speleological Society
ISBN 978-1-68044-008-9
american Caving
1967-2017
