
---------- Page 1 ----------
PART II
1984 American Caving Accidents
NOVEMBER 1985

---------- Page 2 ----------
NOVEMBER 1985
VOLUME 43, NO 11
published monthly by The National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, AL 35810. Subscription rate is $15 per year. When changing an
address, give old address as well as new. Second-class postage paid at
Huntsville, AL and additional mailing offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the National Speleological Society,
Inc., Cave Avenue, Huntsville, AL 35810.
COPYRIGHT 1985
The National Speleological Society
American Caving Accidents
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS- 1984
This is another volume of reports of safety incidents and accidents from caves in
North America. Surely, it is the worst year so far.
First, there were seven separate incidents resulting in nine fatalities, and none of
these involved SCUBA diving. Furthermore, there are a total of 69 full and brief
reports; only a few years ago, the totals were around 40. In the realm of cave diving
fatalities, I include only three reports but, sadly to say, two of these involved NSS
divers. Before this year there had been none at all involving the organized caving
community. As usual these three reports are only a token representation of this
type of problem but this is reasonable, since cave diving appears to be more a part
of scuba diving than it is or cave exploration.
Hopefully, this explosion of fatalities and increase in incident reports merely
represents an unusual year. So far, 1985 looks better.
Because of the fatalities, I have added another category to the classification
scheme:
AA - Fatalities
A - Injury and Evacuation
B - Evacuation or Other Essential Aid
C - Injury
D - Safety Incident, No Injury or Aid
E - SCUBA
In the analyses I have tried to include the observations of people on the scene, as
much as possible. As you read these reports, try to remember that the important
thing is to look for ways to make your own brand of caving safer. If you don't agree
with the analyses, don't get angry, just make up your own.
So, read on - and try not to become a double A.
Send accident reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
Steve Knutson
505 Roosevelt Street
Oregon City, OR 97045
503-655-6609
EUROPEAN VERSUS AMERICAN SRT
Last issue an incident (Discovery I Cave, CA, 9-3-83) was reported where a
caver's arms gave out while using a Frog ascending system. I recommended the
Mitchell or Rope Walker systems for free drops and received a letter from a
Canadian caver who preferred the Frog, made the point that it is very popular in
Europe, and called me "glib, overly simplistic and unfair." Well, Shucks, I
thought, maybe I should look into this so I did, and found a very interesting
situation.
STAFF
Editor
Steve Knutson
Mike & Lynne Sims
Front & Back Covers
Photos by Steve Knutson
In the United States cavers developed advanced vertical systems in the 60's,
based on the concept of doing long, free drops. At first this involved knots (like the
3-knot prusik) or Jumars (the Mitchell or Inchworm systems), but reached a
culmination with the advent of the Gibbs ascender in 1968 which worked in a
superior fashion, speedwise, when attached to one knee and one foot, as the
Ropewalker. The desire to do long, free drops led to a desire for a rope suitable for
such and this led in turn to the formation of Bluewater Limited and, later, Pigeon
Mountain Industries. Cavers developed ropes with special characteristics for long
drops - high abrasion resistance, low stretch, no spin, etc. This development
continues to this day, with the advent of SSP rope, out of California. The result was
a rope, early on, that was very suitable.
As ascending systems, both the Ropewalker and Mitchell systems proved to be
very versatile. The Ropewalker is great on slopes and at breakovers, once the
mainline is released from the chest, since both main ascenders are low, and on
separate feet. The Mitchell is good on slopes once the mainline is removed from the
Box, converting to a Texas (the upper Jumar to the seat harness, the lower to one
foot). An overhung breakover is difficult, but one learns to overcome it. Both are
excellent on long, free drops. Thus we have American SRT. Very efficient systems
on an 11mm, very abrasion resistant, very strong, rope.
The Europeans (and because of British colonial influence, the Australians,
Canadians, and New Zealanders as well) went a different route. In Europe very
long drops came to be done, and in some circles are still being done, entirely on
cable ladders. As the American technique developed, however, the advantages of
SRT became obvious, and European cavers began to convert. The availability of
suitable rope was a problem; rock climbing ropes were expensive and not very
abrasion resistant, American ropes had to be imported and apparently were either
expensive or scarce, or both. Thus the Europeans began to use 8 and 9 mm ropes
that were not very strong and not very abrasion resistant but were available and
cheaper than larger sizes. To avoid problems with the characteristics of these
ropes, they evolved techniques different from ours. If a drop is not entirely free,
they will, at points of potential abrasion, re-anchor the rope so that it is again free.
These are called "re-belays" and on a long drop, there may be several. Moreover,
if the top of the drop is not free, but for instance, curves away as with a flowstone
slope that the rope will lay against, they will rig so that excess main line is kept at
the top, to be hung over the slope. Then, as one ascends and reaches the breakover
below the slope, one switches to the excess - the second rope - and uses both to
get the rest of the way up. This, of course, is not even SRT, but is quite obviously
Double Rope Technique. The end result of this is that an ascender system has been
evolved that works well with the restrictions of their cumbersome, but necessary,
rigging. This is the Frog, which uses the upper Jumar attached to the feet and a
lower Jumar fixed between a chest and seat harness (though it apparently is often
just attached to the seat harness). This works well in passing the "re-belays" and
"deviations" and suffers no problem at overhung canopies because of the second
rope rigged there.
So, the Frog is fine for European SRT (DRT?) but is, to me, inferior for American
SRT.
The expense of rope is a big factor. In New Zealand, for example, 150 feet of 11

---------- Page 3 ----------
mm rope might cost $300, so it is easy to see why a caver there might embrace a
system like the European, which offers maximum protection to the rope.
The book by Neil Montgomery on SRT suffers from the fact that the American
and European systems are discussed as if they are one, and the result is confusing
and potentially dangerous.
Personally, I see the American SRT as superior except for the size and bulk of the
rope we use. The Europeans can carry more length for the same weight and bulk. I
feel we could streamline our SRT by going to smaller sizes, yet still retain a
reasonable safety margin. Both PMI and Bluewater offer a 10 mm size which I have
used and like very much. Even 9 mm is usable in the Anerican SRT if proper care is
used in descent and ascent. American caving rope is very good and I don't think
we've really "hung it out" yet.
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED:
Type
Cave
State
Date
A
Morril's Cave
Tennessee
5-83
C
Talucha Cave
Alabama
Summer83
B
Whiting's Neck Cave
W Virginia
11-83
1984 REPORTS:
A
Powell Mountain Cave
Virginia
1-15
B
Tiftonia Cave
Tennessee
1-23
D
Indian Cliff Cave
Kentucky
1-27
B
Joya de San Miguel
Guer. Mexico
1-29
A
Hosterman's Pit
Pennsylvania
2-4
A
Wild Woman Cave
Oklahoma
2-11
B
Cave in Decatur
Alabama
2-13
E
Jacob's Well
Texas
2-26
B
Spring Valley Caverns
Minnesota
3-18
B
Drake Mountain Cave
Alabama
3-19
A
Little Mouth Cave
Indiana
3-20
B
Clarksville (Wards-Gregory) Cave
New York
4-7
B
Clover Hollow Cave
Virginia
4-14
AA Snail Shell Cave
Tennessee
5-20
B
Devil's Den Cave
Tennessee
5-26
B
Johnson Saltpeter Cave
Tennessee
5-27
A
Indian Caves
California
6-6
AA Valhalla Pit
Alabama
6-10
B
Moler's Cave
W Virginia
6-17
A
Spanish Cave
Colorado
Summer
C
Gruta de Carrizal
N. Leon, Mexico
July
B
Hughes Cave
Alabama
8-7
AA Natural Bridge of Rogue River
Oregon
August
AA Rogue River Gorge
Oregon
August
A
Fulford Cave
Colorado
8-12
A
Cave near Dillon
Montana
8-15
E
Flying H Cave
Arizona
8-18
A
Carroll Cave
Missouri
8-26
A
Pettijohn's Cave
Georgia
9-22
B
Doghill-Donnehue Cave
Indiana
9-23
B
McFail's Cave
New York
9-25
A
Wayne's Cave
Indiana
10-13
AA Natural Well
Alabama
10-13
AA Thunder Hole
Indiana
10-13
A
Cave of the Madonna
New Mexico
11-4
A
Sharer's Cave
Pennsylvania
11-19
B
Cave in Knoxville
Tennessee
11-22
C
Fitton Cave
Arkansas
11-23
AA Cass Cave
Virginia
12-1
E
Blow Hole Cave
Hawaii
12-23
OTHER INCIDENTS:
B
Pine Hill Cave
Kentucky
2-83
B
Indian Rock Cave
Alabama
3-83
D
Rolling Thunder Cave
Alabama
4-83
D
Doodlebug Pit
Alabama
Fall83
C
Carver Wells Cave
Kentucky
11-83
C
Fisher Ridge Cave
Kentucky
12-83
D
Systema Huautla
Oax., Mexico
12-83
D
Fisher Ridge Cave
Kentucky
Feb
C
J-4 Cave
Pennsylvania
Mar
D
Valhalla Pit
Alabama
Mar
C
Climax Cave
Kentucky
Apr
C
Wayne's Cave
Indiana
Apr
B
Gaping Holes Lava System
California
May
D
McClung's Cave
W Virginia
May
C
Wolf River Cave
Tennessee
June
D
Hellhole Cave
W Virginia
July
D
Hellhole Cave
W Virginia
July
D
Crevice Cave
Missouri
Aug
D
F.T.A. Pit
W Virginia
Sept
C
Mammoth River (Grady's) Cave
Kentucky
Sept
D
Byers Cave
Georgia
Sept
D
Harlansburg Cave
Pennsylvania
Sept
B
Sloans Valley Cave
Kentucky
Sept
D
Fisher Ridge Cave
Kentucky
Oct
D
Paul Penley Cave
Virginia
Oct
B
Twin Cave
Oklahoma
Fall
A
Nutt Cave
W Virginia
Nov
B
Breathing Cave
Virginia
Nov
A,B
Laurel Caverns
Virginia
Nov
B
Fisher Ridge Cave
Kentucky
Nov
D
Hidden Cave
New Mexico
Nov
D
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
Nov
B
Skull Cave
New York
Dec
C
Fisher Ridge Cave
Kentucky
Dec
B
Tom Moore Cave
Missouri
Dec
D
Acme Mine No. 5 Cave
W Virginia
Dec
A: Morril's Cave, Tennessee


********** May 20, 1983
At 2 p..m. on May 20, 1983, two cavers entered Morril's Cave in Tennessee.
They explored for a while in the basically horizontal cave, then started out. They
were going out by a different route when Chris Sproles (19), trying to descend a
ledge, lost his footing and fell. He landed abruptly, fracturing both ankles. His
companion went for help. The Avoca Fire Department and Bluff City Rescue Squad
responded. NCRC was also alerted. The victim was evacuated with the victim
giving route direction to the rescuers.
Reference: Christopher Sproles NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pp.
Analysis: The victim reports that he was using new boots without lug soles. It also
sounds like he was moving vertically without three points of support. Also, when
climbing, one should mentally anticipate a fall and try to be ready to land in such a
way as to minimize injury.
C: Talucha Cave,, Alabama
Summer, 1983
In the Summer of 1983, four cavers entered Talucha Cave in Alabama. These
were Lonnie Burrell (17), Billy Busbey (18), Mike Martini (18) and Adam Houge
(18). They had one flashlight apiece and were wearing jeans, T-shirts and tennis
shoes. They were without helmets and had been in a cave only once before.
About sixty feet into the cave they came to a twenty foot drop, mostly a slope of
about 70 degrees. The right side of this slope had a heavy electrical cable fixed as a
hand line. The left side, various holds. Burrell started down the left side. About five
feet from the top he lost his footing, rolled down the slope and fell free for six feet,
landing on a breakdown pile. He suffered sprained fingers and was dizzy for about
ten minutes. They proceeded through the cave. By the time they started out,
Burrell's hand had swollen to the point where he could not move it, but he made it
out under his own power.

---------- Page 4 ----------
Reference: Lonnie Burrell Accident Report undated, March 1985 2 pp.
Analysis: As Burrell says, they "were simply a group of flashlight and tennis shoe
jerks.' After the accident, Burrell yielded to peer pressure to continue with the trip
when he should have exited immediately.
B: Whiting's Neck Cave, West Virginia


********** November 12, 1983
On November 12, 1983, Brian Bergeson was leading a group of high school
juniors and seniors, part of a Horizon's program, on a trip in Whiting's Neck Cave
in West Virginia. They were setting anchors for a rappel when they noticed a group
of Boy Scouts below. Descending, Bergeson observed that one of the scouts was
prostrate and unconscious. He was told the boy had been so for 45 minutes. Since
the scouts were hauling each other up bodily with a one inch hemp rope, and none
too swiftly, Bergeson and his partner put the boy in a harness and hauled him up,
while sending for an ambulance. The boy was carried out of the cave.
Reference: Brian Bergeson "untitled" Subterranean Sun (Sligo Grotto) Feb, 1984 p
7.
Analysis: They never learned what was wrong with the unconscious youth.
Bergeson suspects he was in shock from fright. He also lists the scout group's
deficiencies: no backup lights, lack of proper vertical equipment and no one
seemingly in charge.
A: Powell Mountain (Rocky Hollow) Virginia


********** January 15, 1984
At about 1 a.m. on January 15, 1984 a group of three cavers entered Rocky
Hollow Cave on Powell Mountain in Wise County, Virginia. The weather included
snow and freezing temperatures. They were well-clothed but apparently had only a
single light source each. They rigged a rope at the entrance and descended
hand-over-hand, down a steep incline and the 40 foot entrance pit.
After exploring for some time, Jeff Fields took a fall, injuring a leg. While
Hershel Scott stayed with the victim, Mike Flanary was able to climb out and get
help.
At 10:30 p.m. the NCRC was called and teams from Bristol/Blountville, Bland
County, Virginia and Marion, Virginia responded. Fields was found to have a
fractured ankle, lacerated forehead, and probable fractured ribs. The victims were
removed from the cave at 6:30 a.m.
References:
1) Ken Crowder "Teams Work to Free Two Men From Cave" Times News
(Kingsport, TN) Monday, January 16, 1984 pp 1, 2A.
2) Jim Lawrence "Cave Incident Report" Nashville Grotto NSS 1 p.
3) Ed. "Rescuers Save Two Men From Cave in Virginia" Washington Post January
17, 1984.
4) Ed. "Accident in Virginia" D. C. Speleograph February 1984.
B: Tiftonia Cave, Tennessee


********** January 23, 1984
At about 4:30 p.m. a group of six cavers (teenagers) entered Tiftonia Cave in
Tiftonia, Tennessee. The cave is apparently of sufficient complexity that some time
later they became "separated and lost."
The destination of at least some of these teenagers was known, so when parents
became concerned, they went to the cave entrance, found the kids' vehicles and
called the police. Hamilton and Walker County Rescue Squads were brought in and
at about 11:30 p.m. the lost cavers were found.
Reference: Ed. "Six Youths Found Safe After Being Lost 7 Hours in Tiftonia Cave"
Chattanooga News Free Press January 24, 1984.
Analysis: It seems probable that a poor choice of lights contributed to this incident.
D: Indian Cliff Cave, Kentucky


********** January 27, 1984
On January 27, Brent White and Kelvin Whitaker prepared to enter Indian Cliff
Cave in Pulaski County, Kentucky. This requires a 60 foot rappel down a cliff face to
where a horizontal passage leads off, 20 feet above the base of the cliff. At 4:30
p.m. White started down the cliff. They were planning on camping in the cave SO he
had a 30 pound pack in addition to a 10 pound pack of cave gear.
As he went down, he was able to remain upright as long as his feet were on the
wall. To miss a rock sticking out, he kicked out and was soon pulled upside-down by
the weight of his backpack. He didn't have sufficient strength to right himself but
was able to continue his rappel, slowly, to the base of the cliff.
Reference: Brent White "Indian Cliff Cave" Pulaski Underground (Lake
Cumberland Speleological Society) April, 1984.
Analysis: White points out that they could have lowered the packs separately or
used a chest harness to hold the rappeller upright during the rappel (I've seen use
of a link from the main line above the rappel gear to the chest harness). One can
also put packs on a tether attached to the rappel gear or seat harness, allowing the
packs to hang just below the rappeller.
B: Joya de San Miguel, Guerrero, Mexico


********** January 29, 1984
On January 29, a group of six cavers visited the Plaza de Gallos area in the State
of Guerrero, in Mexico, to continue a project. They split into two groups of three,
one going to start the exploration of Joya de San Miguel.
They were rigging a rope at the entrance drop, in the bottom of a very steep
dolina, when Senor Perena slipped and fell into the pit. He managed to grab the
uncoiled (but not yet rigged) rope as he went over the edge and his son, Ramon
Espinasa Perena, grabbed the middle portion, thus offering a 'belay" of sorts.
With the aid of this the fall was stopped a short way down the 80 meter initial drop
with the elder Perena clinging to a wedged rock. He then tied into the rope and was
able to climb out.
Reference: Ramon Espinasa Perena "Caving Near Plaza de Gallos, Guerrero"
AMCS Activities Newsletter 14 September 1984 pp 88-92.
Analysis: The edge of a pit, especially a surface pit, should be considered an
exposed site and anyone working right at the edge, or on a slope to the edge, should
be belayed or safetied in some way. Senor Perena had been caving for three years
and mountaineering for thirty.
A: Hosterman's Pit, Pennsylvania


********** February 4, 1984
On Saturday, February 4, a group of five cavers entered Hosterman's Pit in
Centre County, Pennsylvania. About halfway through their trip they reached the
Subway. In an effort to avoid the water, Jim Kennedy (23) tried to climb to a ledge.
In stretching and exerting to reach the ledge, he "applied a little too much
rotational force to (his) right leg, aggravating an old knee injury." He collapsed,
partly in the water, but with assistance, pulled himself out. The knee began
swelling but he could still flex it and put weight on it. They decided to head out, the
others helping Kennedy. He managed a narrow, sloping chimney using only his
good leg. He traversed the top of the Pipe Pit on belay and soon was at the bottom
of the entrance drop. By modifying his vertical rig into a Texas (one leg Jumar, one
seat sling Jumar) he ascended with help from a caver ascending a second rope.
Reference: Jim Kennedy "Accident Report" Nittany Grotto News 31:2 Winter 1984
p 17; Personal Communication, March 1985.
Analysis: Kennedy's knee had suffered a "ruptured lateral collateral ligament" 18
months prior to this incident. It had not given trouble for a year so he wore a knee
pad instead of a brace. One should consider, however, that a weakened major joint
might well give problems in a situation like caving with its diverse and stressful
contortions, and do what one can do to control this possibility, such as wear a brace,
and avoid the particular movements that stress the injured joint in the direction it is
weakest. Everyone has limitations - the problem is to find and respect them.
A: Wild Woman Cave, Oklahoma


********** February 11, 1984
On February 11, a group of thirteen cavers was on the Spade Cattle Company
lease in Oklahoma, to visit Wild Woman Cave. At around noon they found the
upper entrance to Bitter Enders Cave. This involves a thirty foot drop down a
slightly rough, sloping wall. A rope was tied to a nearby 6 inch tree. Cavers began
to descend, unbelayed. Most wore hardhats.
At 1:15 p.m., Dave Fabry (28), without a hard hat and the heaviest of the group,
began his descent. As soon as he put tension on the rope, it untied from the tree.

---------- Page 5 ----------
He fell feet first until his chin hit a ledge ten feet down, causing him to flip. He hit
the bottom on his right side and buttocks. He was bleeding from a cut on his
forehead and a smaller one on his shoulder.
A shirt was torn up to bandage the bleeding while Victor Pyle set up a new rope
and rigging to evacuate the victim. Fabry was hauled out at 1:40 p.m. The victim
had lost some blood but was in good spirits. He proved to have an additional head
cut but no other injuries.
Reference: Rob Kolstad "Accident Report" La Madre Grande do Oztotl
(Dallas-Fort Worth Grotto) February 1984 pp 7-8.
Analysis: It is not clear if the victim was rappelling or using the rope as a handline.
In any case, as Kolstad points out, the situation was begging for an accident. When
the pit was rigged, the experienced personnel were not on hand and did not check
the rigging (already in use) when they arrived. The victim was in charge and thus
able to resist using a hard hat.
In a group of this sort (a youth group combined with four grotto members and two
other experienced cavers) it is essential to give some specific orders regarding the
rigging of the pit and the descent. The group had split up to find the entrance and it
should have been made clear that no one was to descend until experienced people
checked the rigging. Leadership also requires the setting of a good example which
the victim failed to do, not wearing a hard hat himself.
B: Cave in Decatur, Alabama


********** February 13, 1984
At about 3:30 p.m. on Sunday, February 13, three cavers entered a cave off
Indian Hills Road SE, in Decatur, Alabama. They used a 120 foot rope as a handline
to get down the initial twenty foot vertical drop and subsequent slopes to the 90 foot
level. It had been sunny when they entered but rain soon began. On exiting, one
caver got up the rope hand-over-hand but the rope became so muddy that the other
two couldn't make it. The rope was knotted and thrown back down but water began
showering down so the two, Andrew Cross (17) and Wade Wilson (18), waited while
their companion went for help.
The State Police assembled a rescue team which included troopers, a survival
expert and a former member of an aerial assault team. They got to the victims at 8
p.m., attached harnesses and soon completed the evacuation.
Reference: Dana Beyerle "Explorers 'Relieved' at Rescue" Decatur Daily
(Alabama) February 14, 1984 p 1.
Analysis: The cave was 50 degrees and hypothermia could have been a real danger
if the third member of the group had been unable to exit. They were dressed only in
jeans and shirts. Needless to say, they were ill-equipped, with flashlights and
hand-over-hand vertical technique.
E: Jacob's Well, Texas


********** February 26, 1984
On Sunday, February 26, at about 7:50 p.m., three divers entered Jacob's Well
near Wimberly, Texas.
These were John Wilcox, Danny Self (both diving instructors) and Wayne Russell
(36) a cave diver of 12 years experience. This was to be a quick mapping dive, to get
overall dimensions. It was also a trespass (without landowner permission), and thus
may have been hurried, without ordinary preparation and planning. They seemed
to have good equipment with single 80 cubic foot tanks, depth and pressure
consoles, three lights apiece and a single 50 cubic foot tank with octopus regulator
left at the 25 foot level. A guideline was placed as they descended, secured at 25
feet (the bottom of the vertical shaft out), 50 feet, 75 feet, and 90 feet.
In the fourth chamber they checked their air pressure. Wilcox and Russell
proceeded to lay a line into the fifth chamber while Self explored the fourth. Wilcox
and Russell proceeded into the sixth chamber with Wilcox taking pictures and
Russell attaching a 100 foot survey tape to be used to measure the lower chambers.
Russell then returned to Wilcox and signaled that it was time to go. They proceeded
into the fourth chamber.
In the third chamber, Self and Wilcox met up and Self signalled "Where's
Wayne?' Wilcox pointed down the tunnel behind, assuming Russell was working
with his survey tape or putting his tank on. He had been just behind when entering
the fourth chamber. They had to assume he would catch up; their air would not
allow anything else. They made their decompression stops, waiting a little extra
time, and worried, but could do nothing when Russell failed to appear. At the
surface they waited several minutes, then, at 9:16 p.m., they notified the Sheriff's
Office.
The body was recovered the following day at 12:17 p.m. It was found in the fifth
chamber, lying on the safety line, tank empty. The coroner's verdict was drowning.
References:
1) Richard Harbordt "NSS Accident Report" (from Cave Diving Manual) no date 5
pp.
2) Ed. "In Memory of Wayne Russell" Texas Caver February 1984.
3) Danny Self "Jacob's Well - Accident Report" Texas Caver April 1984 pp 26-27.
4) Johnny Ripps "Come Dive in Jacob's Well With Me" Texas Caver April 1984 pp
32-34.
5) Doug Rhodes "Death of a Diver" NSS News 42:6 June 1984 pp 214-215.
Analysis: This is another of the seemingly inexplicable diving mishaps where there
was no obvious problem, yet there was a fatality. Why didn't Russell continue up
with the others? Perhaps his air had been used up faster than the others, or perhaps
nitrogen narcosis caused him to delay. We'll never know.
B: Spring Valley Caverns, Minnesota


********** March 18, 1984
On March 18 a group of fifteen cavers gathered at Spring Valley Caverns in
Fillmore County, Minnesota. They split up into groups of three or four to push and
survey remaining leads. The cave is mainly walking passage with very little vertical
work. A commercialization project had resulted in stairs at vertical pitches but
these had rotted away. At the southwest end of the Grand Canyon is a five to six
meter wall of breakdown with more walking passage at the top. A 3/4 inch
galvanized pipe stood vertically there, the only remains of a set of stairs. The
present group carried a painter's wooden ladder to use at this point. In place, it was
a foot shorter than the pitch.
Late in the trip Calvin Alexander (41) was heading out. One caver was near the
bottom of the ladder as Alexander approached the top. The two were conversing as
Alexander attempted to step down to the first rung of the ladder and turn around at
the same time. His foot missed and he fell, his foot catching between the first and
second rungs. His shoulder struck the wall and he was left hanging upside-down,
holding the galvanized pipe.
The victim was helped upright, then down the ladder. He felt alright, so exited
the cave under his own power. Medical examination showed a dislocated shoulder
with one small bone chip.
References:
1) Calvin Alexander "Spring Valley Caverns - An Accident Report' Minnesota
Speleology Monthly 16: June 6, 1984 pp 91-93.
2) Calvin Alexander Personal Communication April 30, 1984.
Analysis: Alexander admits this was the result of a momentary, thoughtless
carelessness. This of course is just what often happens at the end of a trip. The
need to concentrate becomes more important as it becomes more difficult.
This accident could have been very serious if Alexander's foot had not caught in
the rung.
B: Drake Mountain Cave, Alabama


********** March 19, 1984
On Sunday, March 19, four cavers entered Drake Mountain Cave in Alabama.
With a 200 foot rope they did the first 78 foot drop, looked at the second (128 foot),
decided their rope was insufficient and started out. All got out except for Greg King
(16) who had trouble with his prusik knots. After it became obvious he wasn't going
to make it, the others went for help.
When local cavers, called by the rescue squad, arrived, they began setting up a
hauling system while one rappelled in. The victim was able to climb out on Jumars
loaned from the rescuer.
Reference: Don Francis "Drake Mountain Rescue" Huntsville Grotto Newsletter
25:4 April 1984.
Analysis: Prusik knots are prone to be unusable when the wrong combination of
sling and mainline is met. Thus, if you make your slings of a given material and
diameter, and practice successfully on a given mainline, then meet a different
mainline, or a line under different conditions of mud/water, you may find the slings
do not work. It is reported that helical knots do not suffer from this problem.
A: Little Mouth Cave, Indiana


********** March 20, 1984
At around midnight Monday night Richard Foster (25), Chris Foster (24), Laura
Adams and Linda Adams entered Little Mouth Cave near Laconia, Indiana. After

---------- Page 6 ----------
negotiating some crawlways they encountered a 40 foot pit. Richard "took a false
step" and fell into the pit. In the fall he hit his forehead and sustained nemerous
bruises including a large scrape on his left thigh.
After ten minutes he was able to rise and climb to a ledge halfway up. At that
point Chris Foster tried to climb down to help but fell sustaining a head cut. Seeing
that he was bleeding, the Adams sisters left to get help.
Rescuers arrived in about an hour; one was able to negotiate the crawl and soon
ascertained that Chris Foster was suffering from hypothermia. Ropes were brought
through the crawls and the men were hauled up. They were able to walk away from
the entrance with assistance.
References:
1) Mary Dicter "Hoosier Brothers find life's the pits at bottom of 40 foot hole in
cave!" Louisville Courier-Journal Wednesday, March 21, 1984 p 1.
2) Clay Rice "Two men termed 'inexperienced" pulled from cave" Louisville Times
Tuesday, March 20, 1984, p 1.
3) Jackie Carpenter "Two spelunkers rescued from Laconia cave" Corydon
Democrat (Indiana) March 21, 1984, pp 1, 10.
Analysis: The cavers, though supposedly experienced, had only flashlights, and no
rope. They professed to only go into caves that they knew to be safe, yet when faced
with an obviously dangerous situation they proceeded. Cavers looking for an
accident.
B: Clarksville (Wards-Gregory)Cave, New York


********** April 7, 1984
At about 11 a.m. on April 7, a party of six cavers entered Clarksville Cave in
Clarksville, New York. This was a Tufts University Mountain Club group and only
their leader had previous caving experience. They explored the upstream, Wards
section of the cave and returned to the Wards entrance where two of the party
exited. The remaining four headed into the Gregory section and proceeded the 500
feet to Brinley's Sump. Most of the year this is two feet of near sump with one foot
of air space. In high water periods, as was the case on April 7, it is sumped for 5 to
10 feet.
The group discussed the situation and decided (majority vote) not to make the
dive. Simon Yi (18), however, with two flashlights proceeded into the sump,
emerging in an air-filled room. He became disoriented, developed doubts about his
ability to dive the sump back to the group, and after wringing out his clothes, wisely
sat down to await rescue.
At 4:30 p.m. the rest of the group exited to get help. The State Police were called
and they ultimately reached the Albany-Schoharie Cave Rescue Team. At 6 p.m the
first of this group arrived at the cave. Six of them were soon escorted to the sump
and at 7 p.m. after one unsuccessful dive a rescuer made it through and fixed a
guideline. Yi was "cold but rational. The Gregory Entrance was the obvious route
out, but was sumped closed. Yi was reassured but did not want to attempt to dive
back through the sump so the rescuer returned and divers were summoned.
At 9:30 p.m. two rescueres free-dove the sump and gave the victim some hot
chocolate. Yi was still in good condition but it was obvious that hypothermia was
only a matter of time. A scuba tank soon arrived and the victim was instructed in its
use. With a face mask, strong diving light, and holding a rescuer's arm, Yi
proceeded through without difficulty. He exited the cave with an escort at about
11:30 p.m.
Reference: Paul Rubin and Chuck Stephens "Rescue at Clarksville Cave"
Northeastern Caver 15:3 (1984) pp 62-65.
Analysis: The decisions and actions in this rescue all seem reasonable. The
interesting question here is why did the victim go through? Some animal species
have an instinctive drive to explore in order to expand the territory of the species.
Obviously man is one of these. Perhaps this explains cave exploring, but what
about the seemingly suicidal urges that occasionally come upon some of us. Yi was
quoted as saying "I just got an impulse to go through - I just wasn't thinking."
B: Clover Hollow Cave, Virginia


********** April 14, 1984
On April 14, at about 11 a.m. a group of four entered Clover Hollow Cave in
Virginia. It had rained the previous night and there was a chance of showers
predicted for that day. They observed that the entrance was taking no more water
than a previous trip, despite the weather.
They rigged the two short drops near the entrance, negotiated the Grand Canyon
and proceeded with a tourist trip to the Gypsum Room and other areas. Meanwhile,
on the surface a storm was dumping two inches of rain.
On the way out, it appeared that there was more water than usual at the Grand
Canyon. At the first of the two drops water was gushing over. Larry Ostrander
ascended first followed by Sonja Ostrander and Jane Glasser, with Tom Spina
holding the rope free of the water as much as possible. They were worried at this
point about a low place near the entrance where high water might block their exit.
They began thinking of high, dry places to sit out the flood.
A straddle passage between the drops required a belay but the low place proved
open and they soon found themselves at the entrance drop where water cascaded
down. Larry Ostrander and Glassser ascended without difficulty and tried to re-rig
the rope out of the water. Meanwhile the spray and breeze at the bottom rapidly
cooled the remaining two. These broke out garbage bags and a carbide lamp for
warmth. It was about 6:45 p.m.
When the rope was finally rigged, Sonja Ostrander made it up but Spina (35)
became more chilled while holding the rope for her. After warming up again in the
garbage bag, Spina tried an ascent but was weak and felt he couldn't make it. He
retreated and called for help.
The others passed down a pack with hot coffee, sugar, a space blanket, and a
bottle of raisins and peanuts. Meanwhile they had called for assistance. At 9 p.m.,
a rescuer reached Spina and determined that all was well. He was out by 10 p.m.
References:
1) Tom Spina "April Showers" SPLASH (Tidewater Grotto) 4:4 April 1984 2 pp.
2) Tom Spina NSS Accident Report Form undated.
Analysis: The group was well prepared for such an emergency and Spina showed
good sense in not attempting the final waterfall "do-or-die" fashion. One feels
justified in criticizing the entering of a stream cave just after a rain with more rain
expected.
AA: Snail Shell Cave, Tennessee


********** May 20, 1984
On Sunday, May 20, at about 5 p.m. James Whitfield (21), Randy Day (26) and
Bryan Tibbs (20) plus a pet dog entered Snail Shell Cave in Rutherford County,
Tennessee. The group used a borrowed canoe and had a Coleman lantern, a
flashlight and a Bic lighter. Some distance into the cave, one of the men stood up,
capsizing the canoe. Tibbs held on to the canoe while the others treaded water.
Tibbs finally found an underwater rock on which he could balance himself, head out
of the water. One after the other, he heard the sounds of his companions drowning.
At 6 p.m. the owner of the canoe became alarmed; the men had promised to
return in 15 minutes. He called the Rutherford County Rescue Squad, which arrived
at 7:30 p.m. Tibbs was found by 10:30 p.m. The bodies of the other two were found
early the next morning in 20 feet of water, by dragging from a boat.
References:
1) Ed. "Man Hospitalized After Accident in Cave Kills Two" The Tennessean
Tuesday, May 22, 1984 p 4-B.
2)Charlie Appleton "Two Men Drown in Rutherford Cave" Nashville Banner May
21, 1984 p 1.
3)Jim Lawrence NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pp.
3)Bryan Tibbs "Trapped underground for 7 hours" National Enquirer January 8,
1985 p 45.
Analysis: The survivor was found 250 yards inside the cave. He was hospitalized for
hypothermia and shock. The others apparently swam for some time and there was
conversation between them. The group formed just to "explore" the cave and
apparently had no knowledge of each other, caves, or canoes. NCRC help was
suggested, but never called for.
B: Devil's Den Cave, Tennessee


********** May 26, 1984
At about 2:30 p.m. on Saturday, May 26, 1984 two cavers entered the Devil's Den
Cave near Coble, Tennessee. They rigged the entrance drop, a 75 foot descent - 25
feet of steep slope and 50 feet free to breakdown. They explored for a couple of
hours then returned to the pit. At about 4 p.m. the first caver ascended on Jumars
in about 15 minutes. John Wagoner (34) started up but at 30 feet the carabiner
attaching his seat harness to a Jumar came undone. He rapidly fatigued and hung
upside down. His companion dropped a rope and Wagoner tied this to his harness.
He was then raised to an upright position. Then the main line was cut to lower his
feet to a small ledge. His companion then went for help, at about 4:10 p.m.
The Sheriff, Hickman County Rescue Squad and a couple of local cavers arrived.
Brian Crist, a caver, directed the evacuation. A goldline was lowered and tied
around the victim's chest as a belay line. A PMI was anchored at the surface and

---------- Page 7 ----------
lowered to become the new main line. The victim was changed over to the PMI and
instructed by Crist as he climbed out. In 30 minutes he was at the surface (6:10
p.m.).
References:
1) Bill Shanes Offense Report Hickman County Sheriff's Office.
2) Brian Crist Personal Communication June 20, 1984.
3) John Wagoner "Incident at Devil's Den" undated, 1 p.
4) Ed. "Trapped Explorer Rescued from Devil's Den Cave" Hickman County Times
Wednesday, May 30, 1984.
Analysis: The caver was not using a locking biner on his seat harness; this allowed
the safety to the harness to detach, preventing him from doing the sitting phase of
his (apparent) Texas rig. Biners can open in odd and unexpected ways.
B: Johnson Saltpeter Cave, Tennessee


********** May 27, 1984
At about 6:30 a.m. on May 27 three cavers entered Johnson Saltpeter Cave in
Putnam County, Tennessee. They proceeded for about 3,000 feet to a 40 foot pit.
This they rigged with a rope and rappelled down. Two ascended again but the third,
Steve Hawkins (21), was unable to do so. The others tried to help but finally, at 6
p.m., left the cave and notified the Putnam County Rescue Squad.
A team was assembled and at about p.m. the rescue began, some proceeding to
the pit, some staging along the way to help in the evacuation. The initial effort
failed and the Lebanon Unit of Nashville Grotto Cave & Pit Rescue was called in.
The victim was hauled up the pit and conducted to the entrance, reaching the
surface by midnight.
References:
1) Nashville Grotto Rescue Unit NSS Accident Report Form undated, 1 p.
2) Mary Jo Danton "Student 'Caver' Rescued" Herald Citizen (Cookesville,
Tennessee) May 28, 1984 p 1.
3) Ed. "Incident: Stranded Person" NCRC Newsletter No. 3 January 1985 p 11.
Analysis: The cavers were apparently using hand-over-hand technique, and this led
to the stranding.
A: Indian Caves, California


********** June 6, 1984
On June 6, a school group from Arkansas was touring Yosemite National Park in
California. Some of this group entered Indian Caves, a large talus cave situated
near the base of the Washington Column at the east end of the valley.
The group proceeded through a tight passage into a small room about 150 feet
from the entrance. As one caver, a teenage girl, entered this room she stood up, hit
her head on the ceiling and was knocked unconscious. Companions went for help.
At about 1 p.m. the Park Command Center was notified and dispatched rangers
to assist. When the park medic arrived, the victim had regained consciousness. A
cervical collar and KED were applied as a precaution against possible spinal
injuries. Radio contact was made with the park medical clinic, only one mile from
the cave. The victim was placed in a litter and moved through the constricted
passage and hauled up a 12 foot drop to the surface.
Reference: Beth Elliot "Incident: Head Injury" NCRC Newsletter No. 4 August
1985, p 18.
Analysis: The park rangers were experienced with "big wall" rescues but found the
constricted circumstances of this rescue quite difficult. Otherwise, this is a fine
example of the perils of the casual caver, flashlight in hand and no helmet on the
head.
AA: Valhalla Pit, Alabama


********** June 10, 1984
On Sunday, June 10, a total of 18 cavers visited Valhalla Pit, Jackson County,
Alabama. This trip was in conjunction with the Southeast Regional Association
Summer Cave Carnival. The pit is 50 to 60 feet across, and from the usual low-side
rigging point is 227 feet to a large talus pile. The first 50 feet is against the wall,
then the drop is free with a considerable belling out at the bottom. The pit is on a
steep hillside with a cliff above the pit on the uphill side and a stream bed coming
down around one edge of the cliff and up to the edge of the pit at one end. This
conducts water only in times of flood. At the bottom, on the downhill side, there is
an alcove, a concave undercut. The pit has been described as the most impressive
open air pit in the State if not the entire Southeast.
Three Georgia Tech students, David Zurn, Samuel Crawford (21) and Michael
Hanebaum (20), rigged in the usual low-side spot. They were the last of the 18 that
had done the pit that day. The last of the others had left at p.m., while the Georgia
Tech students were exploring passages off the bottom. Shortly before 7:30 p.m.
Zurn started up. The other two were sheltering in the alcove at the bottom, a
common practice for waiting cavers. A register had been placed there at one time.
When Zurn was about 100 feet up he suddenly heard a terrible sound. "It was
incredible like an earthquake. When it stopped he shouted down to his
companions. For several minutes he hung there and yelled. There was no response.
Zurn finished his climb, ran to Hanebaum's vehicle and drove to the first house
where he telephoned for help.
When rescuers arrived they discovered that a 30 by 30 foot section of the wall
behind Hanebaum and Crawford had fallen over, splitting in two as it did so, and
killing both cavers instantly. One caver could be seen from the shoulder blades up
and the other was under the center of one slab. The bodies were recovered by
digging beneath the slab which was estimated at between 50 and 250 tons.
References:
1) Don Francis "Valhalla - Report from Huntsville Grotto Rescue Chief"
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 25:7 p 51.
2)Carl Craig "The Valhalla Tragedy - View from the Bottom of the Pit" ibid. pp
52-55.
3) John Van Swearingen IV "The Valhalla Rescue - A Personal Description" ibid.
pp 55-57.
4) Allen Padgett "Bodies Recovered from Valhalla" NSS News August 1984 pp
257-258.
5) Chuck Canfield, Steve Davis, Kenneth Huffines, John Law, Ed Strausser
'Accident Report, Valhalla Pit, Alabama" Georgia Underground June 1984.
6) Ed. "Accident Report" The Windy City Speleonews August 1984 p 44.
Analysis: At the bottom of a pit one selects what looks like the safest spot and waits
there. If there is no such spot, one must go into an adjacent passage. One cannot
fault Hanebaum and Crawford for being where they were. One can look for hazards,
as one caves, SO as to avoid them - loose rocks above, a shattered and thus
unstable wall, footholds that may be friable - but one will still not see all of them.
We must face the fact that caves are never totally free of hazard.
A body recovery is the grimmest of all jobs for a rescuer - there can be no happy
ending. Still, in this case numerous agencies, the news media and cavers worked
smoothly and well together.
B: Moler's Cave, West Virginia


********** June 17, 1984
On Sunday afternoon, June 17, Steve Goodson (20) and Robin Wyrick (19)
entered Moler's Cave near Harper's Ferry, West Virginia. They explored for some
time, then had trouble with their only carbide lamp, which they were unable to
re-light, presumably because of a wet flint. The matches they were carrying also
became wet and refused to light. Their back-up flashlight then died leaving them in
the dark. They tried to persist, by following a stream, but the passage became too
narrow. They climbed up onto a ledge, and yelled for an hour or so. They huddled
together for warmth.
On Tuesday, Wyrick's mother alerted the State Police. The caver's vehicle was
found outside Moler's Cave. They were found about 1 a.m. Wednesday, having
been in the cave about 2 1/2 days.
References:
1) Ed. "Lost Cavers Huddled to Keep Warm - and Prayed" The Inter-Mountain
(Elkins, W.Va.) June 21, 1984.
2) Terry Headlee "Lost Cavers Learned About 'Survival and Courage'
"Martinsburg Journal (W.Va.) June 21, 1984.
3) Richard Belisle "Footprints in Mud Lead to Cave Rescue" The Morning Herald
[Hagerstown, Maryland] Thursday, June 21, 1984 pp 1, A7.
Analysis: The problem was a lack of light sources. These cavers had only a single
carbide lamp and flashlight - not enough for even one caver. They had no food or
extra clothing.
A: Spanish Cave, Colorado
Summer, 1984
In the Summer of 1984 three cavers visited Spanish Cave in the Colorado Rockies
at an altitude of 11,500 feet. The cave has ah upper and a middle entrance with a

---------- Page 8 ----------
vertical extent of some 700 feet. It is wet and cold (35 degrees). A hike of several
hours is required to reach the cave.
This group entered via the middle entrance, proceeded through a crawlway and
traversed around the pit leading to the lower cave. This was made easy by a snow
bank partly blocking the pit opening. They then chimneyed along in a meandering,
wet, narrow canyon, doing several climb-ups along the way.
At the Seven Pool Room the leader did a ten foot climb up a small, trickling
waterfall. This is short but difficult in that the climber starts under the overhang of
the falls in a three to five foot wide chimney and after ascending a few feet must
lean out, get handholds on the sides of the two foot wide passage above the lip of
the falls and pull himself up. Kent Albers was at the point of getting over the falls
when he suffered a dislocation of his left shoulder. He yelled and the caver at the
top pulled him the rest of the way up.
The arm was immobilized by tying it to the victim's body with one inch webbing.
A harness was made from the webbing and put on Albers. The victim was then
escorted from the cave using excess webbing to lower him down the several short
drops. In this way they made it back to the middle entrance. Once out of the cave,
the victim was unable to continue because of shock. A companion hiked out,
secured the use of a horse and returned with this to complete the evacuation.
Reference: Anon. Untitled Incident Report undated, 4 pp.
Analysis: The author makes several observations. 1) The party could not be split
after the accident so that hypothermia gear could be brought in from camp because
of the inexperience of one caver. He feels that four might have been a better party
size. 2) If Albers had not been able to make it out, they would have had insufficient
exposure gear to help him until more could be brought in from camp. This could
have been critical, since the evacuation of an incapacitated caver would have taken
considerable time. That is, if hypothermia is allowed to set in, from initial lack of
equipment, the victim might not survive the evacuation.
In alpine caves the margin for survival after an accident is much less than in
warmer caves. The above is a good example of survival by self-rescue.
C: Gruta de Carrizal, Nuevo Leon, Mexico
July, 1984
In late July of 1984 a group of three cavers visited Gruta de Carrizal in the State
of Nuevo Leon in Mexico. Near the first lake, 50 meters from the entrance, Arnulfo
Gomez set up to do some photography. The tripod mounted camera was set on the
selftimer and the shutter released. Gomez then ran down a slope toward the others
to get into the picture. Unfortunately, he slipped and fell, injuring one leg. This was
thought at the time to be a sprained ankle, but medical examination revealed a
fracture in the long thin bone just above the ankle.
Reference: Craig Bittinger AMCS Activities Newsletter 14 September 1984 p 13.
Analysis: The photographer was reportedly "mooned" by his companions as he ran
to get into the picture. But surely running over uneven ground in poor visibility is
all we need cite for cause.
B: Hughes Cave, Alabama


********** August 7, 1984
On Tuesday, August 7, Joseph Colebraugh (19) entered a cave on Brindley
Mountain, south of Decatur, Alabama. Some time later he became stranded when
he "lost his light source.' Around 8:30 p.m. he was reported missing to the
Huntsville Police Department and thus to the Morgan County Sheriff's Office and
the Huntsville Grotto Rescue Team. The victim's former caving companions related
that they had found a second extrance over the ridge. This was suspected to be
Foxes Lost Cave so the rescuers split their efforts. The two former companions also
entered the cave to look for the lost man. All three were located at 1 a.m.
References:
1) Ed. "Man Rescued form Morgan Cave" The Huntsville Times Wednesday,
August 8, 1984 p B-5.
2) Don Francis "Hughes Cave Event" Huntsville Grotto Newsletter September
1984 pp 72-73.
Analysis: Solo caving with a single light source. Talk about adventure It's good
that the local cavers are well organized for rescue.
AA: Natural Bridge of the Rogue River, Oregon
August, 1984
In early August of 1984, tourists were visiting the Natural Bridge of the Rogue
River north of Medford, Oregon. At the Natural Bridge, the full stream of the
Rogue River flows through a lava cave for some 350 feet. This cave is apparently
always filled to the roof with water.
About 60 feet from the upper, submergence end is a round, shallow hole six to
eight feet in diameter, called the "Blowhole," which leads to the main flow. The
water in this hole is constantly churning. A man (about 40) was at the edge,
observing, when he suddenly lost his balance and fell in. He quickly disappeared.
The body was never recovered.
Reference:Norm Grenell, Rogue River National Forest Personal Communcation
October 17, 1985.
Analysis: A friend was nearby but the victim was sucked into the flow too fast for
the friend to be of aid. When you stand unbelayed at the brink of a pit or the edge of
something like this, you court disaster. Churning water currents have a fearsome
power.
AA: Rogue River Gorge, Oregon
August, 1984
Sometime in August 1984, kids were playing in the Gorge of the Rogue River
about two miles upstream from the Natural Bridge, north of Medford, Oregon. One
boy (12) slipped and fell into a hole. This apparently led to a cave which takes part
of the flow of the river. The boy was swept off into the cave and the body was never
recovered.
Reference: Norm Grenell, Rogue River National Forest Personal Communication
October 17, 1985.
Analysis: Climbing above a drop usually creates a natural fear which in turn brings
caution. Climbing above water seems safe - but this is only true if the water is
calm.
A: Fulford Cave, Colorado


********** August 12, 1984
On Sunday morning, August 12, a number of cavers were visiting Fulford Cave in
Colorado. Edward Petefish (30) and a companion were climbing into the Attic at
about 11 a.m. when Petefish fell about twenty feet. His companion climbed down to
the victim who had sustained multiple head injuries and was bleeding. He was
unconscious for about three minutes. Cavers from another group (Southern
Colorado Mountains Grotto) arrived quickly and began administering first aid.
They checked for neck or back injuries and watched for signs of shock. The head
wounds were bandaged and after a rest period the victim was escorted from the
cave (1:30 p.m.).
References:
1) Todd Warren "Accident at Fulford Cave" Rocky Mountain Caving Autumn 1984.
2) Bruce Costa "More on the Fulford Accident" ibid.
Analysis: The victim had a hard hat with no chin strap. Ironically his only serious
injuries were to the head. The elastic straps on some helmets are little better,
usually coming off on the first impact. Any serious caver should have a helmet rated
for multiple impact.
A: Cave Near Dillon, Montana


********** August 15, 1984
At about 11 p.m. on Wednesday, August 15, four cavers entered an abandoned
mine above the town of Argenta, near Dillon, Montana. From the mine they
entered a cave and began exploring. At about 3:30 a.m. Thursday, Frank Kujawa
(22) "slipped and fell ten feet into a hole" suffering a compound leg fracture.
Rescuers reached the mine at about 6:30 a.m. The evacuation involved raising
the victim, on a stretcher, up vertical drops and partly removing him from the
stretcher to get around tight corners. The evacuation of the victim was a thirteen
hour effort.
References:
1) AP "Student rescued from mine" Independent Record (Helena, Montana)
August 17, 1984.

---------- Page 9 ----------
2) Andrew Dayton Personal Communication September 3, 1984.
Analysis: Too little information.
E: Flying H Cave, Arizona


********** August 18, 1984
On August 18, 1984 two scuba-equipped cavers began a dive in a sump about 175
feet from the entrance of Flying H Cave in southeast Arizona. A line was in place
and both were keeping a hand on it. After three and a half minutes the leader felt
violent tugs from Brett Zepp (37), the second diver. He moved to Zepp quickly and
found him thrashing wildly about against the roof of the small chamber,
mouthpiece out. The other diver offered to buddy-breathe but Zepp was in the
throes of panic or a siezure and refused to cooperate. He soon went limp, however,
and was quickly hauled back to the surface (about three minutes). He was
apparently dead and attempts at resuscitation had no effect. Later CPR had no
effect.
References:
1) Rick Day Personal Communications February 16, 1985; March 11, 1985.
2)Ed. "Diving Fatality in Arizona" NSS News September 1984, p 271.
Analysis: This was labeled a drowning by the coroner but Zepp was diabetic and he
may have been suffering some sort of physiological crisis. His scuba equipment was
found to be functioning normally. Day suggests he may have aspirated vomit.
A: Carroll Cave, Missouri


********** August 26, 1984
At 9a.m. on Sunday, August 26, a group of eleven cavers entered Carroll Cave in
Camden County, Missouri. They proceeded in two boats to the Mountain Room. At
the Azure Pool they split up, agreeing to meet at 3:30 p.m. Five went back to
Thunder River. The rest took photos for a while, then started out. At about 3 p.m.,
near the 5,500 foot marker, Alberta Zumwalt (36) slipped on slick mud, twisting an
ankle. This resulted in an audible "pop" and great pain. Gradually the pain
lessened. The ankle was splinted with the 5,500 foot marker, a small pack and a
belt. There was a wait of an hour and ten minutes while a boat was fetched from the
Mountain Room. The victim was then floated, dragged and carried out in the boat,
reaching the entrance about 6:30. The ankle was found to have a fractured bone.
References:
1) Alberta Zumwalt NSS Accident Report undated 3 pp.
2) Alberta Zumwalt "Carroll Cave: My Story" Ozark Speleograph October 1984 p
48.
Analysis: This is a good example of self rescue. Hard mud banks are very slick
when wet; some are so hard they offer little purchase, even to lug-soled boots.
A: Pettijohn's Cave, Georgia


********** September 22, 1984
On September 22, a Georgia Nature Conservancy group entered Pettijohn's Cave
on Pigeon Mountain in Georgia. This trip was to let conservancy members see
"what fun caves are." There were 28 conservancy people and five experienced
cavers. Hardhats were provided but had no chinstraps. Lights were hand held. The
physical condition of personnel ranged form poor to good.
The group was split into two of 14 novices each. Both groups would follow the
same route, into the Big Room, down to the Flat Room, through the "Z" bends
back through the flats, up into the Big Room and out, about 2,000 feet of traverse.
They proceeded with this plan. Before they got to the Z bends, four people had
decided caves were no fun and had to be escorted out. As Bill Franks was being so
escorted up from the Flat Room to the Big Room, he slipped, fell about six feet, and
rolled fifteen feet down an incline. His hard hat flew off and his head struck a rock.
Chuck Haus quickly checked him for injuries, stopping the bleeding from a small
scalp cut. Franks then exited the cave under his own power.
Meanwhile the second group, led by Allen Padgett, had cleared the Z bends and
was headed up into the Big Room. Robert Boone, a large person who had had
trouble getting through the crawls, fell, his hard hat falling off. At the bottom of the
slope he "landed hard on some rocks, hitting his head.' Padgett descended
immediately, finding the man unconscious, bleeding freely from a scalp cut, and
with labored breathing. Padgett rolled the victim onto his back and cleared his
airway, easing his breathing. Pressure slowed the bleeding. It was 3:56 p.m.
One caver left to fetch a first aid kit, another to start a rescue effort. Boone was soon
conscious and the bleeding was stopped. He was moved to a smoother spot and
placed on extra clothes and covered with a space blanket. He knew his name, but
not the date. He complained of his hands going to sleep and a pain in his back.
When the first aid kit arrived, the head wound was dressed, and a warming tent
constructed from a garbage bag and candle. The remaining conservancy group
members were conducted from the cave.
Meanwhile rescue personnel had arrived on the surface, and soon entered the
cave. Boone was placed in a SKED stretcher and moved out of the cave by a crew of
eighteen. A haul system was used at the climb-up. Boone was placed in an
ambulance at 7:30 p.m. As well as the scalp laceration and various contusions, he
was found to have a cracked vertebrae.
Reference: Allen Padgett "Accident Report" Georgia Underground December
1984 pp 10-11.
Analysis: For a trip such as this Padgett suggests helmets with chin straps and
helmet-mounted lights, and an experienced person for every three or four novices.
This trip suffered from lack of such and this was the result of poor pre-trip
planning, as Padgett states. Padgett himself was the victim of someone else's bad
planning. Sound familiar?
B: Doghill-Donnehue Cave, Indiana


********** September 23, 1984
At 5 p.m. on Sunday, september 23, four cavers entered Doghill-Donnehue Cave
in Indiana. They intended a through trip from Doghill to the Culvert Entrance of
Donnehue Cave. This is a 55 degree stream cave with over three miles of mapped
passage. Dawn and Paul Moore and Eric Baade had two years of caving experience
but Mark Dilley (32) was a novice. They reportedly had appropriate clothing. The
trip included several deep pools.
At about 9 p.m., about 2,000 feet short of the Donnehue Culvert, Dilley was
attempting a difficult "S" bend when he became stuck. He was on his right side,
with his right arm extended, upper body higher than his legs. He had managed to
get his chest past a ledge but couldn't get his pelvis past, or his chest back.
Fortunately the Moores were in front and Baade behind and the tight section
opened up quickly on either side so that they had access to the ledge.
Dawn Moore and Baade exited, obtained a hammer and chisel from a nearby
farm and called the Bedford Fire Department. Fire department personnel arrived at
about 10:30 p.m. and Eric Baade and a fireman re-entered the cave with the
hammer and chisel, a long-handled sledge and a pry-bar.
At about 11 p.m. Paul Moore and three other cavers entered to lend assistance.
The victim, though damp from a dip in a pool prior to the entrapment had suffered
only occasional shivering.
An hour was spent chipping away part of the ledge before the victim was free.
Dilley was nearly exhausted, however, and the usually short trip out took two and a
half hours. He arrived at the entrance at 3:30 a.m.
Reference: Noel E. Sloan "Stuck in Doghill-Donnehue" NCRC Report 2 pp.
Analysis: Dr. Sloan believes "the level of exhaustion and its effects on their exit
time is notable, because it seems out of proportion to the preceeding situation. This
may reflect some mild hypothermia, although the cavers deny other symptoms to
support this. Other possible contributing factors are dehydration and lack of
adequate nutrition. The party had not eaten well prior to the trip and did not take
any food underground (expecting a short cave trip)."
Noel also points out that "getting stuck is a problem which seems more common
with novice cavers. This probably reflects a lack of experience in caving technique
combined with fatigue."
The getting stuck and the fatigue may well be related to the caver being a novice.
it is easy to forget that the novice will generally spend more energy than an
experienced caver in every phase of caving. When he becomes trapped, he is also
less able to cope psychologically. In short, a novice should be expected to have
problems and, as much as possible, this should be allowed for.
B: McFail's Cave, New York


********** September 25, 1984
On Tuesday, September 25, a group of five cavers entered McFail's Cave in New
York. Their exploration took some time. On the way out they were about 300 feet
beyond the Northwest Dome (over three miles from the nearest entrance) when a
rockfall occurred, trapping John Wendell in a crawlway. Two others were within
earshot and hurried to find Wendell face down with heavy breakdown on his back
and legs. He was having difficulty breathing. Fortunately the crawl was sufficiently

---------- Page 10 ----------
spacious for Wendell's companions to pull off the rocks. Wendell was able to exit
under his own power. The victim had no serious injuries but his left leg was sore for
several weeks.
Reference: John Wendell Personal Communication March 11, 1985.
Analysis: Rockfall is more common than one might think, but it probably seldom
occurs without some provocation. If Wendell had been in a tighter crawl
A: Wayne's Cave, Indiana


********** October 13, 1984
At about noon on Saturday, October 13, a party of eight entered Wayne's Cave in
Monroe County, Indiana. This group consisted of Louis Verner, a professor at
Illinois Wesleyan University, and seven students. They proceeded down the 15 foot
entrance drop, through 300 feet of walking passage, 1200 feet of belly crawl and 600
feet of passage ranging from stoopway to crevice to crawlway. At 4 p.m. the group
was just beyond Breakdown Mountain and looking for the way out. Verner (36)
slipped and fell about 25 feet suffering injuries to his face and an arm and leg.
Four of the students went for help and were led out by two local cavers they
happened to meet in the cave. At 5:40 p.m. they called Bloomington Hospital for
help. Other agencies were notified, ambulance and fire department personnel
arriving simultaneously. At 6 p.m. a fireman, EMT and two local cavers entered
with an EMT tech kit and oxygen tank. They proceeded to the accident site by 7:30
but found themselves at the top of a 40 foot drop with the victim at the bottom. They
were unaware of a lower level route to the bottom so gave instructions to take vital
signs and slow the patient's heat loss by close body contact.
Meanwhile (6:30 p.m.) the local caver call-out was initiated. Soon eight cavers
entered with rope and climbing gear and others started laying phone line into the
cave. Also at this time Dr. Noel Sloan was called and informed that there was a
single patient with a broken back. He requested a KED backboard and either a
scoop or split basket litter be taken to the victim. These were taken at 7 p.m.
Since many local cavers were out of town, an Indianapolis call-out was started
with Louisville cavers being called and put on standby. At 9 p.m. Dr. Sloan entered
the cave and reached the top of the drop at 9:20, simultaneously with the rigging
team. Sloan reached the victim at 9:30 p.m. and an initial evaluation showed him to
be in critical condition. His oral temperature was 97.4 with uncontrollable
shivering. He had multiple facial fractures, possible skull fracture, lacerations and
eyes swollen shut; blood pressure 100/60, heart rate 46 and regular. Internal
injuries and closed head injuries were suspected but not apparent. Clothing had
been placed under him with a caver lying on him for warmth.
The cavers of the original party were shown how to ascend rope and were
escorted out. A group started out to plan the best route while others started
enlarging and modifying passage for the evacuation.
The patient was treated: Ringer's IV was administered, wounds dressed, and
insulation with the KED backboard, clothes and space blankets applied.
At 11 p.m. the litter arrived and by 11:15 the victim was ready for evacuation. His
shivering had stopped. The phone line arrived at that time and was moved out of
the cave just ahead of the victim to provide constant surface communications. The
evacuation was accomplished without removing the patient from the litter, the
route having been well-prepared by other cavers. At one S-bend additional digging
was required, taking 45 minutes. The victim exited at 4:45 a.m., the whole
evacuation taking about five hours.
References:
1) Noel Sloan "Wayne's Cave Rescue" NCRC Report November 28, 1984; CIG
Newsletter January 1985 pp 3-5.
2) John Fabris "Spelunker injured, rescue difficult" Herald-Times (Bloomington,
IN) 18:8 October 14, 1984 pp 1,16.
3)Bill Strother "Caver safe after 13-hour rescue effort" ibid. October 15, 1984 p 1.
4) Bill Tozier "The Wayne Rescue" CIG Newsletter 28:11 November 1984 p 132.
5)Scott Fee "A Memorable Experience" CIG Newsletter January 1985 p 12.
6)Laura Lane "Victim of cave accident on the mend" Herald-Times (Bloomington,
IN) November 19, 1984 p 1.
Analysis: This successful rescue of a critically injured caver, essentially by cavers,
is certainly impressive. Dr. Sloan comments:
"This was the result of good cooperation between hospital personnel,
firefighters, and cavers. The mobilization of cavers from their various weekend
caving projects demonstrates the value of good relations and pre-planning with
State agencies. It also emphasizes the importance of letting someone know when
and where you go caving. In situations where there is a known injury and litter
transport is available, a litter should be sent to the site as soon as possible. In all
incidents, hypothermia should be assumed. A sleeping bag or exposure gear should
be one of the first things to reach the patient. The efficiency of the rescue effort was
improved by the fact that most individuals had worked together in prior caving
incidents or training rescues."
The phone line proved invaluable in preventing confusion and clog-ups in the
1200 foot crawlway.
AA: Natural Well, Alabama


********** October 13, 1984
At about 6 p.m. on Saturday, October 13, Teresa Lynn Carnes (25) and a
companion were exploring the lip of 185 foot Natural Well near Huntsville,
Alabama, when Carnes lost her footing and fell.
Her companion called Mitchell Hall, a vertical caver who tried to call Huntsville
Grotto for the Cave Rescue Unit, then called either 911 or the Madison County
Rescue Squad. Hall arrived at the scene first and rigged a 250 foot Bluewater and at
7:10 p.m., descended to the victim. After ten minutes he was followed by Ed Cain
of the Huntsville Police Department (a former paramedic). At 7:28 the victim was
reported to the top of the pit as "dead due to a massive fracture of the posterior
surface of the skull."
The Cave Rescue Unit (Huntsville Grotto) had meanwhile arrived and at 7:35 sent
down a Stokes litter with all straps. At 7:44 field phone communications were set up
to the victim site and at 10:15 the victim was hauled up.
References:
1) Ed. "Mountain fall is fatal" Huntsville Times October 14, 1984 p A4.
2) Ed. "Natural Well Victim was City Woman, 25" ibid. October 15, 1984 p C1.
3) Ed. "Making it Safer" ibid. October 16, 1984 p A10.
4) Ralph Brigham "Natural Well Recovery" Huntsville Grotto Newsletter
November 1984 p 93.
Analysis: Brigham says the operation went smoothly with only a few indications
that more practice was necessary. Until the field phones were set up there was
difficulty hearing communications from the bottom of the pit due to bystanders at
the top, talking.
AA: Thunder Hole, Tennessee


********** October 15, 1984
On Monday, October 15, 1984 two cavers entered Thunder Hole, in Putnam
County, Tennessee. They proceeded through some horizontal passage and
encountered a pit. To get further horizontal passage a traverse around the edge of
the 130 foot pit on a sloping ledge must be negotiated. At about 10:45 a.m. Stephen
Thomas (18) tried this, slipped and fell. His companion left the cave and called
authorities.
Reference: Jim Lawrence NSS Accident Report Form undated 1 p.
Analysis: The victim was reportedly not wearing appropriate footwear and had only
a flashlight. There was no sign of intoxication. Proper equipment and technique (a
belay) should have prevented this fatality.
A: Cave of the Madonna, New Mexico


********** November 4, 1984
On Sunday, November 4, a group of five cavers entered Cave of the Madonna in
the Guadalupe Mountains of New Mexico. All were experienced vertical cavers.
They intended to camp in the cave and had their equipment in duffel bags. At 3
p.m. Horace Whitt descended the 280 foot drop (the bottom 200 feet of which is
free). Sixty feet down he stopped to untangle the rope and after a few minutes his
brother Winston (29) descended to help. They were on a ledge, attached to the rope
by shunt. Horace pointed out a loose formation on the lip of the ledge. When the
rope was untangled, Horace continued his descent.
After Horace got off rope, Winston announced that he was coming down, got on
rope and started down. Unfortunately the duffel bag he was transporting down
dislodged the loose formation at the edge. As this football-sized missle went
crashing down, Winston shouted a warning. Horace, below, heard and followed his
initial panic thought - get away from the rope - only 15 feet away! His leap sent
him over the side of the edge of the huge breakdown slab on which he had been
standing. He fell some fifteen feet striking his extended right arm, and rolled down
a 25 foot incline before coming to a stop.
Winston called down and received the answer that Horace had broken his arm.
Winston relayed this to those above and it was decided that Winston should go
down while a companion took his place to relay messages.
Winston found his brother fully conscious, his right wrist broken, left shoulder

---------- Page 11 ----------
"subluxed" and his right middle fingernail torn off and bleeding. They moved to a
place of safety. Horace was in severe pain and it was decided that he could not
climb out of the cave.
This decision, to call for a rescue, was relayed up. One companion left to do this
while another lowered a first-aid kit and sleeping bags to the man on the ledge who
then descended to the victim. The arm was immobilized with triangular bandages
from the kit and chemical ice was applied to prevent swelling. Horace was given
food and drink and kept warm with the sleeping bags.
The man going for help was delayed when the truck couldn't make a steep hill
and he had to walk four to five miles before getting a ride. At a ranch the Sheriff
was called. A rescue group was assembled from Southeastern New Mexico and
Eddy County Search and Rescue, Forest Service and Pecos Valley Grotto personnel.
These arrived at 1 a.m. Monday. The injured man was hoisted up using a 4:1 pulley
device, attached to the rope at his chest Jumar and to a belay rope at his waist. A
rescuer ascended alongside. The victim was treated and assisted through the maze
passage to the entrance. He then climbed to the top of the ridge where an Army
helicopter took him to the Medical Center of Carlsbad.
References:
1) Winston Whitt "Accident Report - Madonna" The Texas Caver December 1984
p 13. Also in Southwestern Caver 22:6 Nov-Dec 1984 pp 83-84.
2) Tom Dillon "Rescue at Madonna Cave" The PBSS Monthly Spylunk December
1984 p 1.
Analysis: According to Winston Whitt's report, "The five cavers agreed that
Horace should have been given more time to clear the drop area. Horace felt, in
retrospect, tht he should have dislodged the loose formation."
One must realize that when you get to the bottom of a rappel and get off the rope,
if you yell "Off Rope," the next person is going to start getting on rope to head
down. If you are in danger of rock fall from the drop (movement of the rope, cavers,
etc.) then you must not yell "Off Rope" until you are in a safe place.
A drop should always be cleared of any obvious loose material as the first person
descends.
A: Sharers Cave, Pennsylvania


********** November 19, 1984
On November 19, Jeffery Martaine (23) and several friends went caving in
Sharers Cave, Centre County, Pennsylvania. Apparently they rigged a rope at a
short drop only fifty feet from the entrance. When Martaine tried to climb up,
hand-over-hand, he lost his grip and fell a short distance. this resulted in a wrist
injury and moderate rope burns. Martaine now could not climb out.
At 4 p.m. his friends called for help. Centre County Dispatching Center got the
call and notified the Fire Department, OES and Nittany Grotto. At about 4:30 p.m.
he was pulled up the drop and exited the cave.
Reference: Scott Jones Sharers Cave Rescue Report of Nittany Grotto S/R Section,
p.
Analysis: We cavers use sophisticated vertical rigs, easily do the deepest pits in the
world; the casual spelunker goes hand-over-hand on a twenty foot drop and gets in
serious trouble. Interesting
B: Cave in Knoxville, Tennessee


********** November 22, 1983
At p.m. on Tuesday, November 22, group of three cavers entered an un-named
cave in an abandoned quarry in Knoxville, Tennessee. Each carried a flashlight but
had no other caving equipment. The three paused in a room for a smoke break. At
about 7:30 p.m. Tim McNutt (20) said he wanted to check something and left. He
failed to return. About an hour later the others left and reported McNutt lost in the
cave.
The cave is complex and has more than one entrance. During the night two
rescue teams entered and passed each other in opposite directions. They tried
again the next day and finally heard McNutt yell. He was brought out at about 3
p.m. Wednesday.
References:
1) Ted Griffith "Something to be Thankful for" Knoxville Journal November 24,
1983 p 1.
2) AP "Rescuers Find Knoxville Man Lost in Cave" Chattanooga News Free Press
November 24, 1983.
Analysis: It appears that McNutt's inadequate light source failed.
C: Fitton Cave, Arkansas


********** November 23, 1984
On November 23, five cavers entered Fitton Cave in Arkansas. the group was led
by Mark and Charlotte Stock, very experienced cavers. The other three ranged from
several years to almost no caving experience. They planned to visit the Tennouri
Room and see some walking passage.
After considerable exploring, some of the group were tiring so they started out.
The less experienced were allowed to lead to gain confidence. At one rest stop, they
were discussing rescue, including the notion that in some deep and difficult caves,
evacuation would be so hard that "flatrocking" (dispatching the victim without
evacuation) would be preferable.
Ten minutes later Steve Tkach (30) was climbing a flowstone slope when he
slipped, sliding down and injuring his ankle. Apparently he fell with that foot under
him and it caught on a projection during the fall. Tkach felt that it was broken but
seemed to be dealing with it well enough that he was allowed to proceed out under
his own power; in fact, he insisted. A strap from a cave pack was tied around the
ankle to help support it.
The injury later proved to have been quite severe. Surgery was required "to
reattach torn ligaments, set bones, and install steel pins." A cast was applied for
nine weeks.
Reference: Mark Stock "Accident Report" Sonar February 1985 pp 4-5.
Analysis: There is a tendency in injured people on occasion to deny their injuries, to
themselves and others. Possibly this is due to fear of the injury being serious. In
any case they will insist that they are OK - those with broken legs will try to walk
around, etc. They must be made to resist this, if at all possible. Many injuries can
be made more severe if not immobilized immediately.
AA: Cass Cave, West Virginia


********** December 1, 1984
At about 1 p.m. on Saturday, December 1, Mitch Gubkin (20) and Kurt Harler
entered Cass Cave in Pocahontas County, West Virginia.
The entrance opens on a passage leading 700 feet to a 130 foot drop into the Big
Room. A surface stream enters the cave, flows along this passage and over the
drop. By climbing to a higher level and continuing a bit, one comes to the Belay Loft
where the Big Room can be entered via a 180 foot, dry drop. Neither Gubkin non
Harler knew of this, though Gubkin had been in Cass once before (Harler).
The flowing stream was about three feet across and six inches deep, with a
temperature in the 30's (Dasher). This, plus the winds created by the cascading
water combined for an extremely hypothermiating situation. The two had prepared
for this by wearing a layer of wool over long underwear with Gore-Tex suits on top.
Gubkin had two cave packs including a spare carbide lamp and a space blanket
(Morrow).
They rigged their nearly new, 300 foot rope so that it was out of the main water
flow - it appeared they would only be in spray. Gubkin descended about fifty feet
to a ledge where he got off rappel. Harler followed him to the ledge but after
consideration they decided to retreat.
Harler ascended without difficulty, with icy spray cascading over him. Gubkin
had some sort of difficulty, however, and called up for help. Harler apparently was
able to descend a bit and established voice contact. It was decided that outside help
was needed so Gubkin, who had apparently tried to ascend, retreated to the ledge
where he was left, in an icy shower bath. At about 6 p.m. Harler left the cave and
called for help at a nearby residence. this alerted the Sheriff's Office, State Police,
Rescue Squads, Fire Department, NCRC, etc.
Four cavers from Pittsburg were camped in the area and heard of the problem.
Upon entering the cave and arriving at the 130, they "were amazed to find three
cavers preparing their gear for a descent, totally unaware that a fellow caver
was in serious trouble less than sixty feet below. '(Ordons) They proceeded to rig
the Belay Loft and one descended, stopping level with the victim and only sixty feet
away.
Gubkin was on the rope, "suspended from his climbing rope in a partially
inverted position about six feet or so below the last ledge in the falls. His body was
taking the full force of the frigid water dropping from the ledge and the end of his
rope rose to a coil on the ledge rather than dropping to the cave floor. His body
appeared limp and lifeless and did not respond to my shouts (Ordons)." This
info was relayed to those above by walkie-talkie.
At about 8:30 p.m., rescuers began to arrive. At first only a wetsuit top was
available. This was used by one to reach the victim who was determined, as
suspected, to be dead. Several unsuccessful attempts, including the use of a block
and tackle, were made to haul the body up the drop.
Gubkin's body was finally lowered to the bottom of the 130 foot drop, hauled up
to the Belay Loft and evacuated from the cave, at about 4 p.m. on Sunday.

---------- Page 12 ----------
References:
1) Mike Dyas Personal Communication January 29, 1985 3 pp.
2) Bruce Randall Personal Communications December 2, 1984; March 20, 1985.
3) UPI "Man Freezes to Death; Trapped in Cass Cave" The Inter-Mountain
(Elkins, WV) Tuesday, December 4, 1984 p 1.
4) UPI "Spelunken dies near Marlinton" The Record Delta (Buckhannon, WV)
Wednesday, December 5, 1984.
5) Ed. "Caver Killed" Pocahontas Times December 6, 1984.
6) Curt Harler "Letter to the Editor" ibid. Thursday, December 13, 1984; Personal
Communication March 13, 1985.
7) George Dasher Personal Communications December 4, 1984; March 14, 1985.
8) Dave Morrow NCRC Regional Coordinator's Quarterly Report April 1985, 3 pp;
Personal Communication April 1985.
9) Tom Ordons "Tragedy in Cass Cave" The Explorer (Explorers Club of Pittsburg)
May 1985
Analysis: Gubkin was using a Mitchell rig and this was in good order. When he was
reached by rescuers, the space blanket appeared to have been hastily stuffed into
one of his packs. Thus we can speculate that he tried initially to go up, had trouble
at the first lip above, possibly getting his chest block over. Undoubtedly this was
compounded by incipient hypothermia. He retreated, communicated to Harler and
got out his space blanket to await rescue. Harler left; Gubkin then either got cold,
or (perhaps from the effects of hypothermia) lost patience or rationality and in
either case, decided to "go for it. This was to no avail and he died, hanging in the
water flow. As to why he was below the ledge he had been left on, with the rope
coiled on that ledge, perhaps he irrationally rigged in with slack in the rope, or
retreated after a second unsuccessful attempt and, through weakness, fell off the
ledge. The rope coiled on the ledge is something commonly done by ascending
cavers who don't want the rope to snag when they pull it up from the rig point.
Remember the danger of hypothermia - a caver, macho and strong at the start,
can be reduced to a whimpering wimp after just a few minutes in cold, flowing
water. Even with a wetsuit, one hangup in your vertical gear in a waterfall such as
this and you are in real trouble.
Seven years before, another caver died in this same way, in the same waterfall.
E: Blow Hole Cave, Hawaii


********** December 23, 1984
On December 23, six people were scuba diving near the Blow Hole on the coast of
Oahu in the Hawaiian Islands. Sue Turner (21) apparently became separated from
her companions and entered a cave. She was later missed and a search was
instituted. At 3:30 p.m. a helicopter crew found her scuba tank, regulator and
bouyancy vest floating off cliffs below the Makapuu Lighthouse. About two hours
later her body was found, 60 feet below the surface on a ledge in the cave, about a
half-mile from where her gear was discovered. She still had her weight belt on.
Reference: AP "Diver's death puzzles friends" The Argus (Fremont, Newark and
Union City, CA) December 27, 1984.
Analysis: Too little information. From what is given here, it almost sounds like foul
play. Why would the last piece of equipment discarded in the midst of drowning be
the weight belt? Why, indeed?
OTHER INCIDENTS - 1984
B: Pine Hill Cave, Kentucky


********** February 14, 1983
(Previously reported, ACA 1983, NSS News 42:11 p 349). Cavers were trapped at
the bottom of a pit, while on a through-trip, by lack of vertical gear which would
allow them to go back, and by a blocked crawlway which prevented them from
going on. A recent examination however shows that the "trapped" cavers were
fooled by a blocked floor drain and spent nearly a day awaiting rescue while the
route to the rear entrance was only a ten foot, easy climb above them. (Gary O'Dell
The Kentucky Caver 19:1 pp 4-5).
B: Indian Rock Cave, Alabama


********** March 5, 1983
A caver was unable to climb the 63 foot entrance pit. He was pulled up by the rest
of the party. (Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 25:3 March 1984 p 22).
D: Rolling Thunder Cave, Alabama
April, 1983
Three cavers were mapping in the upper level passage. One caver, while pausing
in the Waterfall Room, felt a movement beneath his feet and scrambled to one side
the breakdown he had been standing on collapsed, revealing a 75-foot pit!
(Russell Turner Bucks County Diviner May 1985, p 16).
D: Doodlebug Pit, Alabama
Fall 1983
A 600 foot Bluewater III rigged in the pit was struck by a falling rock where it lay
over a ledge. The core appeared undamaged - it could easily be seen since the
sheath was completely torn on one side. (Birmingham Grotto Newsletter December
1983 pp 4-5).
C: Carver Wells Cave, Kentucky


********** November 9, 1983
One caver in a group of four fell and received a head cut requiring eleven
stitches. (D. C. Speleograph April 1984 p 9).
D: Systema Huautia, Oaxaca, Mexico


********** December 24, 1983
Parties derigging a bypass route in Nita Nanta and trying to survey the
breakdown continuation toward Sotano San Agustin experienced various high water
problems after a day of rain. (AMCS Activities Newsletter 14 September 1984 pp
66-72).
D: Fisher Ridge System, Kentucky
February, 1984
Three cavers rappelled fifty feet into the new Remington Sink Entrance amid a
continuous fall of small material. Keith Ortiz was hit in the thigh by a shoebox-sized
rock. They continued in and exited via the Historic Entrance which others agreed to
rig before they left. (Personal Communication, Joe Saunders to Mike Dyas).
C: J-4 Cave, Pennsylvania
March, 1984
A caver slipped on the Formation Climb but was caught by companions,
preventing a possibly serious accident. One companion later had a trick knee go
out. (Nittany Grotto News 31:3 Spring 1984 p 11).
D: Valhalla Pit, Alabama
March, 1984
Two cavers were exploring a fissure in the floor of the entrance pit. The fissure's
upper portion is choked with boulders and breakdown, the bottom end is a dark
alcove. One caver jumped from the entrance pit floor to the boulders and climbed
down, to find that the alcove didn't go. He told his companion that it did, and had to
retreat into the alcove when the boulders gave way under his friend's descent. The
companion sustained a few bruises and a cut ear lobe. This occurred about three
months before the Valhalla fatalities. (Buford Pruitt, Jr. Personal Communication
March 26, 1985)
C: Climax Cave, Kentucky


********** April 14, 1984
During a trip a caver noticed pain from her thigh while using a Wheat lamp. After
exiting she discovered a four-inch diameter, second-degree sulfurir acid burn. The
battery had been charged with the vent holes closed and the resulting pressure had
cracked the case. (Electric Caver 20:5 May 1984 p 54; Debbie Vore Personal
Communication).

---------- Page 13 ----------
C: Wayne's Cave, Indiana


********** April 28, 1984
A caver slipped on mud and the resulting grab for support dislocated his
shoulder. He exited the cave in pain and with assistance from his companions. (AU
Cave Passages:2 May 1984 p 1; Keith Calkins Personal Communication).
B: Gaping Holes, California


********** May 26, 1984
Five cavers were exploring in a lava cave of the Gaping Holes Lava System east of
Mt. Shasta in northern California. At the apparent end of a breakdown pile,
Francois St. Gassies (29) was climbing down an inviting hole when, with a rumbling
sound, the breakdown shifted, burying him. He was soon freed by his companions.
As one caver pointed out, lava rocks are porous and thus not as heavy as limestone
or marble. As Wolff points out, if it looks unstable, maybe it really is. (Jim Wolff
"Cave Incident" Unpublished Report June 1985).
D: McClungs Cave, West Virginia


********** May 27, 1984
A caver experienced a carbide explosion on opening his pack resulting in his hair
catching fire. (Massachusetts Caver September 1984).
C: Wolf River Cave, Tennessee


********** June 8, 1984
Debbie Vore (27) fell while downclimbing a six foot ledge resulting in a tumbling
fall down a slope. She stopped just short of a wall but banged her helmeted head,
resulting in a mild concussion. She made it out under her own power, but took
several days to fully recover. (Inner Mountain News 16:4 June-July 1984).
D: Hellhole Cave, West Virginia
July, 1984
During the first week of July, 1984, the De LaSalle Vocational School
(Philadelphia) rigged the entrance drop of Hellhole Cave in West Virginia. This was
left rigged overnight.
During the night, three Marines noticed this rigging, and one hand-over-handed
down to the ledge forty feet below the lip (still over 110 feet to the floor). An
instructor noticed this activity, rappelled down to the victim, put him in a seat
harness and had the class pull him out. (George Dasher Personal Communication
July 24, 1984).
D: Hellhole Cave, West Virginia


********** July 20, 1984
Four cavers were exiting on two caving ropes tied together, with a hard-lay nylon
rope for a belay. The third up switched ropes so as not to have to pass a knot on the
170 foot drop. Part way up he had trouble with his Jumars slipping, but made it
after a long struggle. Watch out for clogged or worn cam teeth. Jumars in good
condition should work on any rope. (Robert Israel Personal Communication
December 12, 1984).
D: Crevice Cave, Missouri
August, 1984
On exiting, a caver got his Jumars jammed in his chest harness at the entrance
drop and eventually had to cut himself free.
D: F.T.A. Pit, West Virginia


********** September 1, 1984
When cavers explored this pit, they found no leads, but as one was ascending, he
was "grazed by a fearsome rock." (J. R. York Grotto Newsletter 20:3 March 1985 p
60).
C: Mammoth River [Grady's] Cave, Kentucky


********** September 6, 1984
Two cavers were on a push/survey trip. On the way out Bob Nadich suddenly
became aware of a severe chafing of his penis. He could find no solution or even
apparent cause and bore the pain and bloody wounds all the way out. On taking off
his wetsuit, once out of the cave, he found a hole with a few taut nylon threads
doing the chafing. The threads were apparently from his worn-out underwear. (Bob
Nadich "Caving Accident" Cleve-O-Grotto News October 1984 pp 4-5).
D: Byers Cave, Georgia
September, 1984
On exiting, a caver was nearly to the entrance after lagging behind when he
slipped and fell forward, hitting his head and losing consciousness for a few
minutes. He was saved from more serious injury by his helmet. (Windy City
Speleonews October 1984).
D: Harlansburg Cave, Pennsylvania
September, 1984
A group of cavers using flashlights were lost in this maze cave long enough to
start a major rescue call-out. They emerged before actual implementation of the
rescue. (Netherworld News August-October 1984 p 26).
B: Sloans Valley Cave, Kentucky
September, 1984
Three youngsters with flashlights became lost between the Well Room and the
Paradise Passage. They were found cold and tired by cavers pressed into rescue
service by locals, and escorted from the cave. (Cave Crickett Gazette October 1984).
D: Fisher Ridge Cave, Kentucky


********** October 20, 1984
Three cavers entered via the Remington Entrance, rappelling the sixty foot drop
on goldline. When they returned to exit, they found the rope lying at the bottom,
having been chewed through by rodents. It had been and was still raining lightly
but they chose to head for the Splash Entrance, since they felt it shouldn't be
affected by a light rain. This proved to be correct.
D: Paul Penley Cave, Virginia


********** October 31, 1984
A group had difficulties negotiating a waterfall dome, suffering tangled ropes
and a "partly broken cable ladder.' (Potomac Caver 27:11 p 198).
B: Twin Cave, Oklahoma
Fall, 1984
Two men about thirty years old entered Twin Cave, Delaware County, Oklahoma
on a Tuesday, finding the lock on the gate broken. Apparently their lights grew dim
and they were forced to wait for help. They were found on a Friday when their
parents came looking (SONAR December 1984 p 8).
A: Nutt Cave, West Virginia


********** November 2, 1984
Two cavers were exiting the cave when one, trying to ascend a thirty foot vertical
wall, fell ten feet and slid down a slope to a creek, injuring his back. A caver rescue
team carried out the evacuation. (Mike Weaver letter to George Dasher, undated).
B: Breathing Cave, Virginia


********** November 5, 1984
A man leading a group of teenagers took a fall into a pit and, though not seriously
injured, could not get out. Two 13 year olds went for help. A call produced response
from grotto cavers, NCRC, CRCN, and a rescue squad. The victim was helped up
the crevice and exited under his own power. Unfortunately the kids had wrecked his

---------- Page 14 ----------
car going for help. (George Dasher Personal Communication December 5, 1984;
Chuck Hempel Personal Communication March 22, 1985
A,B: Laurel Caverns, Virginia


********** November 10, 1984
Several tourists had taken a wild cave tour. A large man (20) fell about five feet
onto his knee apparently suffering torn ligaments. NCRC (East Region) had just
completed a practice training session only minutes before, re-entered and
evacuated the victim in 17 minutes.
Twenty minutes later a team was sent to the rear of the cave to find four
disoriented tourists. (Chuck Hempel Personal Communication March 22, 1985).
B: Fisher Ridge Cave, Kentucky
November 10-11, 1984
A caver was stuck for a short time in a small opening in a breakdown choke.
(Potomac Caver 27:11 p 198).
D: Hidden Cave, New Mexico


********** November 22, 1984
While ascending out of Hidden Cave, Rob Kolstad was on rope on a short drop.
Fifteen feet up his foot Gibbs harness ripped apart at the stitching. He still had two
ascenders attached and so continued up, chimneying part of the way. They then
took a route out that involved no more drops. They speculated that the nylon thread
used was faulty or that the tension on the sewing machine was not correct. Since
they had the sewing done by someone else, it is also possible that synthetic-coated
cotton thread was used. This looks like nylon thread but is little stronger than
cotton. (Rob Kolstad Personal Communication December 7, 1984).
D: Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico


********** November 23, 1984
A group of cavers were working on a dig at the bottom of the ten foot pit at the
east end of the cave. The pit is easily climbed up a dihedral-like corner. One caver
decided to visit other parts of the cave and tried to rush the climb, skipping the
"three points of contact" rule. He fell about six feet, landing on his back. The fall
was cushioned by a plastic bucket which was squashed from the impact. Friends are
now suggesting the caver position buckets below every climb he does. Even on a
short climb, you aren't safe if you will land on an easily damaged part of your body
when a fall occurs. (Dave Allured "Lechuguilla Cave Accident Report" Rocky
Mountain Caving 2:1 Winter 1985 p 11).
B: Skull Cave, New York
December 1984
Cavers were exiting a new section of the cave when a slab of the ceiling in a
crawlway fell on the last man. This so constricted his chest that it nearly prevented
breathing. Fortunately, another caver was able to crawl around this slab and was
able to lift it off. (Roland Vineyard Personal Communication February 21, 1985).
C: Fisher Ridge Cave, Kentucky


********** December 1, 1983
A group of three cavers were in Fisher Ridge to do a climb to a hole on the side of
Don's Biggest Dome. Between Toothless and Midway one caver stepped on a ledge
which collapsed, dropping him twelve to fifteen feet into a canyon. The caver
suffered a cut palm and numerous scratches. The palm bandage was secured by
cutting five holes in a zip-lock bag and wearing it under the glove of the cut hand.
The caver, John Rosenfeld (26) reports that he should not have been proceeding
with his lamp in his hand at the time of the fall, in a stoopway with a canyon in the
floor. He was also not wearing his glasses.
On the entrance pit climb, one caver had a foot come out of a foot loop and in
trying to correct the situation, he dropped a Teknalite, his only working light source
at that point. He was thus left hanging by one Jumar, in the dark. Another rope was
lowered with a loop tied in the end. This was put around the caver's chest and he
eventually made it up with substantial hauling from above. This caver did not have
his own vertical gear. When he had trouble with the borrowed vertical gear, quick
action was necessary due to the subfreezing air blowing down the drop. (DUG
Scoops January 1985 p 7; John Rosenfeld Personal Communication March 22,
1985).
B: Tom Moore Cave, Missouri
December, 1984
Two cavers were exploring in Tom Moore Cave during the week of Christmas
when they encountered a local in street shoes and carrying a flashlight, cold and
upset. This person asked the way out and was given instructions which he
successfully used. (Laura Jones Meramec Caver Jan-Feb 1985).
D: Acme Mine No. 5 Cave, West Virginia


********** December 23, 1984
On December 23, cavers were exploring a cave that begins 1000 feet inside the
mine tunnel. A thirty foot drop was found to have a rope ladder rigged, made of
polypropylene rope with 1 by 4 pine rungs. After exploring they headed out. While
ascending the ladder, one of the rotten rungs broke. The cavers were able to ascend
anyway, all with belays. (Eric Tsakle Massachusetts Caver January 1985).
