
---------- Page 1 ----------
"The line which separates the difficult from the dangerous is sometimes very
shadowy, but it is not an imaginary line. It is a true line, without breadth. It is often
easy to pass, and very hard to see. It is sometimes passed unconsciously, and the
consciousness that it has been passed is felt too lately. If the doubtful line is passed
consciously, deliberately, one passes from doing that which is justifiable, to doing
that which is unjustifiable,"
Edward Whymper
AMERICAN
CAVING ACCIDENTS
A REPORT OF
THE NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIET
SPELEOLOGICA
DISINS
SPELEOBOOKS PRESS

---------- Page 2 ----------
American Caving Accidents
A REPORT OF
THE NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
SPELEOBOOKS PRESS
ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO

---------- Page 3 ----------
Published by
Speleobooks
P.O. Box 12334
Albuquerque, NM 87105
Copyright © 1975 by The National
Speleological Society, Incorporated.
All rights reserved.
Contents
Introduction
Accident Reports
Summary
Appendix: Florida Cave Diving Fatalities

---------- Page 4 ----------
"Twas a dangerous cliff as they freely confessed.
Though to walk near its crest was so pleasant,
But over its terrible edge there had slipped
A Duke and full many a peasant:
So the people said something would have to be done,
But their projects did not at all tally.
Some said: "Put a fence round the edge of the cliff."
Some: "An ambulance down in the valley."
Joseph Malines
Introduction
This report describes 23 caving accidents, all but three of which occurred on a
weekend. Roughly 40 percent of the accidents involved people doing vertical caving.
Both victims of the two fatal vertical accidents for 1972 were novices exploring
caves in Texas.
Cave diving has always been particularly dangerous. In one incident three men
drowned in a Florida cave. In another cave an unconscious man was saved after being
pulled from the water and given artificial respiration. There were undoubtedly other
cave diving accidents which were not brought to the attention of this committee. A
report on cave diving accidents in Florida by David Desautels, executive director of
the National Association for Cave Diving, is included as an appendix to this report.
Other reports of accidents which actually occurred in a cave were included in this
publication: reports of accidents in mines or accidents by people travelling to or from
a cave were not included. Reports were used if help was required from outside the
cavers' immediate group; therefore, reports of searches have been included even when
it was later learned that no one had been injured. All reports of accidents involving
serious injuries were included. Reports of accidents involving minor injuries were
included only if they either required assistance in evacuating the victim or else were
of an unusual nature but point out a definite caving hazard.
Several changes to the format of American Caving Accidents have been made
starting with this issue. The reports are listed chronologically instead of geograph-
ically. Sources of information have been given in more detail than in the past. This
should be beneficial to historians interested in particular caves or accidents. It may
also explain why the details or the analysis of some accidents are sketchy. The sum-
mary has been reorganized into two main groupings to show statistics about the
accidents and the people involved.
Richard L. Breisch
American Caving Accidents Editor
NSS Safety and Techniques Committee
I

---------- Page 5 ----------
Accident Reports
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED 1971 ACCIDENTS
Oregon, Oregon Caves


********** Thursday, 30 December 1971
Steve Knutson and Jim Wolff of the Oregon Grotto, and Phil and Erro Whitfield
of the Vancouver Island Cave Exploration Group entered Oregon Caves at 1:00 p.m.
and proceeded to the South End. A scaling pole, consisting of five 5-foot sections
with a cable ladder attached to the top, was used to investigate a 30-foot-high dome.
Always, when someone was climbing, the other three held the scaling pole in place.
Phil Whitfield and Steve Knutson each ascended less than half-way up but climbed
down. At 4:40 p.m. Erro Whitfield climbed nearly to the top of the pole. Her weight
caused the pole to start to bend. The pole slid along the wall of the dome until the
pole bent and crimped in the middle section. Ms. Whitfield fell, landing on Wolff.
She received a broken tooth and a cut lip.
Analysis: "The pole, although used with success in other situations, was obviously
not strong enough to be used without care. The pole was five 5-foot sections made of
1 1/4 inch-diameter steel tubing (zinc coated) used for TV aerials. Wall thickness of the
tubing was 0.038 inch. Six inches of one end of each tube was flared to fit over the
next section. Its strength was such that both careful placement, so that bending of
the pole be as limited as possible, and careful technique in climbing, so that the
weight of the climber stays over or as close to the axis of the pole as possible, were
necessary.
When a climber is on the cable ladder of a climbing pole setup, and not too far
near the top, his weight is carried by the axis of the pole because the cable ladder
is attached to the top of the pole. If the pole is also set up so that it can be prevented,
by the handlers at the bottom, from bending too far in any outward direction, and
is leaning against the wall being climbed, then the setup is stable. This is the way a
climbing pole should be used.
In our case, however, the climber (Erro Whitfield), while near the top of the
pole, used the pole as a handhold, thus putting a sideways and/or outwards force
on the pole. Things would perhaps still have been OK but the pole in its placement
could slide along the wall and bend in direction of Erro's weight. This it did,
resulting in the accident.
The injuries in this accident were much less than they might have been if Erro's
fall had not been broken by her falling on Jim Wolff, one of the three handling the
pole at the bottom.
It must be pointed out here that the climbing pole did not belong to any of the
people using it. In fact. they did not really have much idea of the potential or
ultimate strength of this pole, though it had been used successfully on previous
occasions. When using homemade equipment. it is absolutely necessary to test to
acceptable limits and preferably to prepare duplicate items and test one to destruc-
tion.
Another item of interest here is that Erro was not wearing a chin strap on her
helmet. When she struck Wolff and a boulder at the end of her fall, the helmet
came off. At that point, the helmet coming off was of no consequence but if the
fall had continued, the helmet's protection was obviously lost. A chin strap should
always be worn while doing any sort of climbing in a cave." (Knutson)
Source: Knutson, Steve. (1972) "Accident in Oregon Caves." Northwest Caving.
Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 8-9 (also appeared in The Speleograph. Vol. XIII, No. 2, p. 16).
Indiana, Wayne Cave
December 1971
A man dislocated his shoulder beyond the crawlway in Wayne Cave. He was able
to crawl out under his own power, with some assistance, in 7 hours.
Analysis: (Insufficient information)
Source: Luvless, Dungass F. (1972) The Speleobopper's Guide to the Caves of the
Gruesome Chapel Valley, pp. 17-18.
1972 ACCIDENTS
Pennsylvania, Arm Pit Cave


********** Saturday, 15 January 1972
After exploring the tight Arm Pit Cave for 1/2 to 1 hour, Roger Young (18) be-
came stuck at about 1:45 p.m. within 10 feet of one of the two entrances. He was
lying on his stomach with his back arched so that his feet were about 2 feet higher
than his head when his left leg became wedged in a crack. William Reiter (21) and
Richard Ertel (25), Young's caving companions, tried freeing him by several methods
including getting a rope around his waist and pulling. After about an hour without
success, they called the Pennsylvania State University Campus Patrol who in turn
contacted the Nittany Grotto.
Shortly after the phone call for help, four members of the Nittany Grotto, by
chance, arrived at the cave to map it. Even with this increase in help and experience,
Young could not be budged. Four additional members of the Nittany Grotto, answer-
ing the request for help, arrived at the cave about 4:40 p.m.
The outside air temperature was 6° (-15°C and falling. The victim was com-
plaining about the cold and his tiring position. A blanket and hot coffee were gotten
to the victim but because of the tight quarters only three people could squeeze into
the cave at one time to assist Young. Young was finally freed by a combination of
pushing from below while others pulled on ropes connected to his waist and feet. He
was out of the cave by 5:40 p.m., having been stuck about 4 hours. He was not in-
jured but was weak and shaky because of the cold.
Analysis: This was Young's second caving trip; his first trip had been to the same
cave. It is fortunate that Young never panicked during his entrapment. Had the
rescue taken several hours longer, hypothermia would have been a major problem.
Young was overweight and the cave is very tight. Nevertheless, had Young had more
experience, he would probably not have gotten himself into such an awkward and
helpless position.
The Nittany Grotto had printed "rescue cards" which list the 24-hour phone
number of the Pennsylvania State University Campus Patrol. Reiter had his card with
him and this was an important factor in getting assistance to the cave quickly.
Sources: Report by Richard L. Breisch

---------- Page 6 ----------
Breisch, Richard L. (1972) "Accident Report: Arm Pit Cave", Nittany Grotto News.
Alabama, Sauta Cave


********** Saturday, 5 February 1972
Two parties of cavers, one from the Dogwood City Grotto and the other from
the Huntsville Grotto, were exploring Sauta Cave. At one place a 40-foot drop leads
to a stream which flows out the lower, wet entrance. It is possible to climb down
approximately 10 feet to a sloping ledge overlooking the remaining drop. Tom Pogue
(18) had climbed down the 10 feet when he lost his footing on the sloping ledge. He
then fell about 25 feet onto a breakdown slope and rolled or bounced into the
stream where he came to rest. Pogue received facial lacerations and bruises on his
head, arms and shoulders.
Since the Dogwood City group did not have a rope, a caver was sent to find the
Huntsville group which was known to have a rope. Pogue remained conscious and
reported on the extent of his injuries to the best of his ability without the benefit
of light. When the rope arrived, Pogue was hauled up the drop and walked out of
the cave with some assistance. He was taken to the Huntsville Hospital where he was
treated and released.
Analysis: Tom Pogue was well qualified (2 years experience) and with a strong
caving group; however, he should not have climbed to the ledge without a belay
line.
Source: Report by Doug Strait and Darwin Moss
Indiana, Grotto Cave


********** Sunday, 20 February 1972
Harry Greg Hill (19) and Linda M. Bringle (16) had been using a lighter and a
flashlight with extra batteries as light sources while exploring Grotto Cave. At about
8 p.m. Sunday evening they realized they were lost and decided to wait for rescue.
They were found at 10:45 the next morning about 2800 feet into the cave by cavers
who were searching for them.
Analysis: Inexperience
Source: Anon (1972) "Lost Spelunkers Safe." Indianapolis News, 22 Feb. 1972
(Reprinted on page 16 of The Speleobopper's Guide to the Caves of Gruesome
Chapel Valley by Dungass Luvless).
Arizona, Black Abyss


********** Saturday, 18 March 1972
Fourteen members of the Central Arizona Grotto, Escabrosa Grotto, and UAAC
entered Black Abyss, a totally tectonic feature having large amounts of loose break-
down. At 5:10 p.m. Pete Kokalis was coming through a small vertical drop in break-
down blocks when his foothold, a rock about 2 feet in diameter, came loose resulting
in Kokalis's falling three feet. The rock had been the keystone for a larger boulder
of about 1000 pounds. This larger block fell, first landing on Kokalis's left foot and
then rolled pinning him to the floor. Kokalis complained of pain in his back, left hip
and left foot. He went into shock.
Several trips were made by members of the group to gather first aid supplies,
food, water and extra clothing. A stretcher was constructed from a bed frame made
of plywood and 2 by 4's. The accident had occurred 450 feet below the entrance,
and it took about 5 1/2 hours to move the victim the 1000 lateral feet to the entrance.
This included a double rope pull of the stretcher up a 40-foot wall. Nine hours after
the accident, Kokalis was loaded into the ambulance to start the 60-mile trip to the
hospital.
Kokalis's injuries were extensive, including left heel bone broken in eight places,
broken left ankle, three simple fractures of the left pelvis, and a cracked cocyx bone.
His recovery period was extended.
Analysis: "A preventive suggestion for such an accident in this cave is difficult - it
just happened! Every caver in the group was fully aware of the extreme loose break-
down hazard in this cave, in fact, Pete Kokalis emphatically explained the hazard to
all before the group entered the cave.
"Since the cavers involved were able to conduct the rescue themselves, the rescue
time was kept to a minimum and the situation was perhaps kept from being any
worse than it was. Also this kept the accident from receiving any publicity that could
have had an adverse effect on Arizona caving.
"We wish to emphasize that it is not normally advisable for the group involved
to conduct its own rescue. A competent rescue team should be utilized if at all
possible. This particular case just happened to have the right people and equipment
at hand. Several of the group have been or presently are members of the Southern
Arizona Rescue Association and had participated in several practice and actual cave
rescues. Additionally, members of this party had basic and advanced first-aid train-
ing. Even so, had the equipment to make the rigid stretcher not been available, this
group would have needed outside assistance." (Bridgemon, et. al)
Sources: Bridgemon, Ron; Kokalis, Peter; Buecher, Bob; Delany, Pete; and Peachey,
Bill. (1972) "Accident at Black Abyss." Cave Crawler's Gazette. Vol. 13, No. 4,
pp. 59-61.
Also printed in Cal Caver, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 37-39.
Texas Caver. Vol. 17, No. 5, pp. 89-91.
Anon. (1972) "Regions Register: Arizona Regional Assoc." NSS NEWS. Vol. 30,
No. 6. p. 101.
Indiana, Sullivan Cave
March 1972
Lorretta Snelson (20) and her brother, Mark Snelson (24), were rescued after
searchers spent 24 hours looking for the missing pair.
Analysis: Probably inexperience
Source: Ann Arbor News clipping, 28 March 1972, p. 1.
Indiana, Shaft Cave
Spring 1972
A group of college students entered the 72-foot deep Shaft Cave with plans of
leaving through Grotto Cave. After learning that there is no passable connecting pas-
sage, they waited 18 hours to be rescued.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Analysis: Inexperience
Source: Luvless, Dungass F. (1972) The Speleobopper's Guide to the Caves of the
Gruesome Chapel Valley, p. 15.
Texas, Devil's Sinkhole


********** Saturday, 15 April 1972
A group of nearly 40 cavers visited Devil's Sinkhole to practice vertical tech-
niques and general caving skills. (Cavers commonly visit the pit in large groups such
as this so as to inconvenience the ranch owner as little as possible.)
There were
seven experienced cavers in the group, but most of the other persons had little
caving experience, although nearly all had attended at least one training session
before the trip. Angeline Palmer, a University of Texas freshman. had twice climbed
up a 50-foot training cliff near Austin This was her first actual caving trip.
"Seven ropes were rigged into the pit and most people descended to explore the
bottom of the pit. There was a shortage of equipment available for the number of
people present. as many of the novices did not own their own gear
"At approximately 2:45 p.m. Angeline asked to use a Texas prusik rig.
She
had practiced on Texas prusik before and knew that she could climb out. The top
Jumar was attached to the seat sling with two short lengths of 1-inch tubular web-
bing. A bowline was used to attach the webbing to the Jumar on one end and to the
seat sling caribiner on the other. A double carrick bend was used to tie the two
lengths of webbing together. The lower Jumar was attached to a single piece of
sling with a bowline for the foot. Steven Bittinger, a competent caver, helped her
rig into the rope and visually checked her equipment, finding nothing wrong. About
20 minutes after Angeline had started her ascent. Craig Bittinger was lying on the
edge of the pit and was witness to the accident He describes the event thusly:
She appeared to be moderately tired from the exertion involved in having
climbed 100 feet. While she was resting on the rope about 30 feet down, /
called to her. "Texas prusik sure is fun, isn't it." knowing full well how tiring
the method is. She looked up and smiled. I glanced away for a second and
then heard a small gasp and immediately looked back to see two Jumars hang-
ing on a rope with no one attached to them. My eyes focused on down the pit
and / saw her tumbling toward the bottom. / immediately yelled several times
for the people on the bottom to look out. A tremendous thud followed. /
then screamed to the people nearby, "Oh my God! a girl just fell in the pit."
"Don Broussard immediately jumped into his car and raced to the ranch house
to phone for a doctor and an ambulance. An ambulance was summoned from Rock-
springs (7 miles). but the nearest doctor was at the hospital in Kerrville (76 miles)
and was not available at the Sinkhole. When the ambulance arrived at the ranch. a
litter and two oxygen bottles were transferred to a Dodge van which had been pre-
pared for the return trip over rough road back to the cave.
"Meanwhile. everything possible was being done for Angeline. She had landed on
her back near a large rock and seemed to be lying in an unnatural manner. Therefore,
every precaution was taken not to move or touch her more than necessary in order
not to cause any worse damage. No breathing was detectable so mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation was begun at once. A plastic oral resuscitating tube available on top was
sent down to facilitate this procedure and blankets were sent down to help prevent
shock. Preparations were made to lower a doctor (should one arrive) into the pit. and
a rope and belay system was set up to lower the stretcher as soon as it arrived.
"Thus prepared, the stretcher was lowered into the pit soon after the arrival of
the van and the process begun of transferring Angeline onto the litter and securing
her to it. She was carefully wrapped in blankets and then strapped down with 2-inch
nylon webbing SO that she could be pulled out vertically with her head up. About 20
minutes elapsed from the arrival of the stretcher until she was ready to be hoisted.
An hour and a half had passed since the time of the accident, during which time re-
suscitation attempts had been continued steadily by Richard Booth.
"The stretcher had been multiply tied with lengths of 7/16-inch nylon rope and
then fastened to a 300-foot length of Bluewater II climbing rope (noted for its non-
stretch, non-spin characteristics). About 20 people on top were organized to pull
the Bluewater, four persons were tied off at the edge to help the stretcher over the
lip, and several more were stationed across the pit with a second rope to pull the
litter away from the ledge as it neared the rim.
"As soon as Angeline was secured into the litter, she was brought out smoothly
and quickly. No more than 90 seconds passed during the ascent from the bottom of
the pit until she was in the Dodge van. Resuscitation continued until the ascent be-
gan and immediately resumed when the litter reached the top of the pit. Oxygen was
then administered on the way to the ranch house and continued until she reached the
hospital at about 6 o'clock. Angeline was pronounced dead on arrival at the Kerrville
hospital."
Analysis: "Although there were no eyewitnesses to see what actually happened dur-
ing the accident, a thorough examination of the equipment showed that the double
carrick bend connecting the two pieces of webbing on the top Jumar worked loose
because of the jerking motion involved in climbing using the Texas prusik method.
As Steven Bittinger describes it. 'At the time that I rigged her up I had no misgiv-
ings about the gear. I had used the exact same system (with the same knots, etc.)
in a recent club demonstration and before that at several deep pits and caves in
Mexico.' This then was an accident caused by an unforseeable failure of climbing
gear.
"The accident would not have been fatal if Angeline had her hands on the rope
when the knot worked loose and had been able to prevent herself from falling over
backwards, or if a safety sling had been used to connect the lower Jumar to the seat
sling. A third possibility, but one that is not quite as likely to have prevented the
fatality, would have been for Angeline to have been wearing an ankle loop to pre-
vent her foot from slipping out of the foot loop. Because she was wearing tennis
shoes, it seems unlikely that this precaution would have been very effective.
"It is unfortunate that the situation at the bottom of the pit encouraged the use
of gear not incorporating all possible safety features. It is a good idea for cavers to
have and use only their own climbing gear, but this is not always possible under con-
ditions such as existed at the Devil's Sinkhole. The following suggestions are recom-
mended to prevent similar accidents:
"(1) The Texas prusik climbing system (or any other system) should never be
used without a safety sling from the bottom Jumar to the seat sling. Foot loops
should be well secured to the feet, and strong boots should be worn to insure that
the ankle loops are an effective precaution.
"(2) Any knot in a climbing rig made of webbing should be sewn shut or else
securely backed up by other knots (such as half-hitches) to prevent the main knot
from coming untied. Knots should also be checked constantly during climbing
activity."

---------- Page 8 ----------
Source: Report by members of the University Speleological Society
California, dig site near Lilburn Cave


********** Saturday, 27 May 1972
The dig site has an opening composed of large rocks wedged in above the en-
trance. A 25-foot deep shaft at a 50° angle intersects a small passage at the bottom of
the shaft. On Memorial Day weekend five cavers intended to continue digging in
search of more cave passage.
At about 12:45 p.m. four people had entered the shaft. Chris Day, the fifth man,
was just beginning to enter. As he shifted positions, he touched a rock level with his
head. The rock, which weighed approximately 200 pounds and was roughly 1 1/2 feet
on a side and 8 inches thick, immediately fell from the ceiling without warning. It
struck Day's left foot, dropped 12 feet vertically, and then bounced another 15 feet,
hitting several times in the small shaft. Because of the suddenness, no one had time
to shout "rock."
Bob Webber (or Bob Wagner) was hit next. It struck the right side of his hard hat,
splitting it, and then hit both his knees. The rock then bounced off the foot wall of
the shaft about 7 feet from the bottom. It hit Keith Britain on the left side of his
head knocking him against the wall and knocking off his hard hat. Finally the rock
landed on the hips and legs of Ellis Hedlund who was halfway into the crawl at the
bottom. Dan Dubrall was not injured since he had already gone down to the first
chamber.
Dubrall and Britain first removed the rock from Hedlund who had been pinned by
it. Day, Webber, and Hedlund all suffered from moderate bruises but were able to
climb out unaided; however Britain had been seriously cut by the rock. He was ob-
served to be stunned, conscious, and coherent, but was bleeding from the nose and
cuts above his left eye and the left side of the head. He was given aid in getting out
of the cave.
Help was obtained from other caving parties in Lilburn Cave. Britain was given
first aid but developed nausea and shock. He was taken by Jeep to the Grant Grove
Ranger Station and then immediately to the Valley Medical Center of Fresno.
Analysis: The rock had been in position for two winters since the dig was started
and was occasionally used as a hand hold in entering and exiting the cave. It was
part of the overhanging lip of the entrance and had been carefully inspected the
previous year although not recently. Especially around digs, potentially loose rocks
should be checked and removed regularly.
Two hard hats were smashed. A hard hat with a crushable liner might have re-
duced Britain's head injury.
The cavers should have entered the shaft one at a time in order to minimize the
chance of multiple injury from falling rocks.
Sources: Ulfeldt. Stan. (1972) "Accident Report." California Caver. Vol. 23, No. 2,
pp. 35-36.
Perry, Luther. (1972) "Bombs Away!" The Explorer. July issue, pp. 77-78.
West Virginia, Hellhole Cave


********** Sunday, 28 May 1972
Gary E. Dartt (30), Bruce W. Smith (24) and Charles Byers (17) discovered a
virgin area of Hellhole Cave about 400 feet below the entrance. On starting out,
Smith prusiked up the 50-foot pit they had just found. While unrigging, Smith inad-
vertently dislodged a 50-pound rock upon which he had been standing. Dartt was
below rigging his Gibbs ascenders. Smith shouted, "Rock!", and Dartt lunged to get
out of the way but was hit on the arm by the falling rock. Byers was clear of the
drop and was not injured by the rockfall.
Dartt's arm was badly cut. It was later learned that the rock had gouged the bone
and ripped the muscle from the bone. After resting 10 to 15 minutes, Dartt ascended
the rope. His arm was then secured to his side to act as a splint. With the assistance
of Smith and Byers, the victim crawled to the entrance room. He ascended the 155-
foot entrance drop by 3 p.m., 2 hours after the accident.
Analysis: The sloping area at the top of the pit had many loose rocks and was es-
pecially treacherous because it was virgin. If the group had spent more time clean-
ing the loose rocks from the edge or if Dartt had waited until Smith had moved
farther back from the edge, the accident might have been prevented.
Sources: Report by Bruce W. Smith
Report by Gary Dartt
Tennessee, an unnamed pit


********** Thursday, 1 June 1972
Don Gass (21) and John Heiss (20) discovered a pit which they entered at about
5:30 p.m. Both of them had done vertical and horizontal caving for several years.
"They rappelled down the narrow 15-foot drop, where they found a tight open-
ing that sloped downwards. Heiss squeezed through this hole into a small, low room
that opened over a drop that was 3 feet wide, 8 feet long and 15 feet deep. He
crossed over the far end of the pit, where he rested for a while on a mud bank. He
then climbed down the drop. He did not know that the wall of the pit that he
climbed down was really a narrow rock sheet that divided the drop into two parts;
the mud bank that he sat on covered over the other part of the drop. At the bottom
of the drop, he found a 3-foot-high opening that connected the two halves of the pit.
He crawled through the hole and just as his head entered the other chamber, the mud
bank covering it collapsed.
"While he was on his hands and knees, a 50-pound rock struck the top of his
fiber glass miner's helmet, crushing a hole through the helmet. The rock then hit his
shoulder, inflicting a large, shallow cut. Although he had a chinstrap on, falling dirt
and rocks hit the back of the reflector on his carbide light, knocking his helmet for-
ward and off of his head. A smaller rock then hit his head, cutting it slightly. He then
tucked his head down and back into the crawlway, which had protected the rest of
his body. Almost 3 feet of dirt fell into the chamber.
"As his light, helmet, and other equipment had been buried by the rocks and
dirt, Don Gass lowered down another helmet and light. After he recovered his own
equipment, Heiss was able to climb out of the pit by himself." (Heiss)
Analysis: "The mud covering was not very stable to begin with, and sitting on it must
have seriously weakened it. Climbing down and then crawling under the sheet of
rock that supported the mud could have created enough vibrations to cause the
collapse. Since the instability of the mud bank was not apparent from the top of the
drop, not much could have been done to avoid the accident." (Heiss)
Source: Report by John Heiss

---------- Page 9 ----------
Arizona, Agua Caliente Cave


********** Sunday, 25 June 1972
Several groups of people, including 26 members and guests of the Southern Ariz-
ona Hiking Club, were exploring the very popular Agua Caliente Cave. This group,
which ranged in age from 13 to over 70, had no one in charge and only two or three
of its members had ever been in the cave before. The group had hand-lined down an
80-foot pit despite recommendations of area cavers. Hiking club member John H.
Mundo (73), who was in the lead. had gotten through the last crawlway and was
starting to climb down to the bottom of the 10-foot exit pit when he slipped and fell.
He fell or slid down the wall on his shoulder and hit the floor with his forehead.
Mundo was not wearing a hard hat and had been carrying a flashlight.
Mundo had fallen about 3:00 p.m. yet when an NSS caver arrived an hour later,
the club still had no definite rescue plans. The Southern Arizona Rescue Association
was contacted and arrived at 6:15 p.m., just in time to meet the injured man who
had climbed out under his own power. He may have suffered a cracked skull and a
dislocated shoulder.
Analysis: The hiking club had too many inexperienced members along who evidently
had little idea about caving safety, equipment, or techniques.
Source: Report by Joseph Lieberz
Mexico, Sótano de la Tinaja
about 1 July 1972
A group of cavers entered Sótano de la Tinaja for the purpose of pushing a siphon
in an attempt to connect the cave with Sótano del Arroyo. It was thought that the
siphon might actually be only a sump with air space just on the other side of the
duckunder. It was hoped that a swimmer could determine this within 20 feet. and if
he could not, he was to return without going farther. Don Broussard was going to try
the connection. He was wearing a diving mask and had a flashlight tied to his waist.
John Fish was to belay Broussard with a safety line tied to the diver's waist.
"A system of tugging signals was arranged and the caver entered the siphon. After
swimming about 17 feet he surfaced in what turned out to be only a small air space.
He took several breaths glancing around the pocket to determine this and then dove
to return to the group. At this moment he blacked out as the pocket apparently
contained very little oxygen and a high concentration of methane. The belayer saw
the rapid dropping of the caver's flashlight and quickly pulled him in with the assist-
ance of the group. Upon being pulled from the water, the caver showed no signs of
breathing so his throat was cleared of water and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation begun
immediately. The caver slowly regained normal breathing and the group was able to
exit the cave." (Inside Earth)
Analysis: Even with a safety line, diving with only a face mask and a flashlight is
reckless. Diving in caves has always been extremely hazardous.
Sources: Anon. (1973) "Accident - Sotano de la Tinaja, Mexico." Inside Earth.
No. 1. pp. 60-61.
Fieseler, Ronnie. (1972) "Accident Report, Near Drowning in Sótano de la Tinaja."
AMCS Newsletter, Vol. III. No. 6. p. 118.
Washington, Dynamited Cave


********** Monday, 3 July 1972
Three teenage boys forced entry into Dynamited Cave which had a locked gate.
About 1500 feet into the cave, one of the boys climbed down a 30-foot, free-fall
drop on 1/4-inch nylon rope, but was unable to climb back out. One of the boys con-
tacted the sheriff who in turn contacted a mountain rescue group. It took one hour
to rescue the boy using the Bilgeri method with a belay; the boy had been trapped
about 10 hours.
Analysis: The boy's inexperience caused him to overestimate his ability to climb a
thin rope.
Sources: Anon. (1972) "Cave Rescue." The Speleograph. Vol. VII, No. 7. pp 79-80.
Arens, John W. (1972) "Accident in Dynamited Cave." The Speleograph. Vol. VII,
No. 8, p. 95.
Arizona, Onyx Cave


********** Saturday, 15 August 1972
Pete Jensen, Jesse Jensen, and Ted Janssen entered Onyx Cave at 6 p.m. Although
Pete had been to Onyx several times before, this was the first caving trip for the
other two. They explored the cave for 4 hours and then realized they could not find
their way out. After an estimated 12 hours of searching, they gave up and waited to
be rescued. They had eaten their five candy bars on the first day. On Monday they
overturned a trash can and found unopened cans of pears and string beans which
they punctured with a broken stalactite. While prying the lid of one can, Pete Jensen
gashed a finger.
The three were rescued at 3 a.m. Tuesday, 57 hours after entering the cave, by
Arizona cavers and the Southern Arizona Rescue Association. The three had camped
for two days within 75 feet of the keyhole which led out.
Analysis: Inexperience.
"In our time spent exploring we never once turned our heads to recall the pas-
sage we had gone through, always looking ahead to the next formation, the next
room beyond. When we did turn around to return. everything looked different.
"In a way I'm glad all this happened to me, because it taught me to go prepared,
and especially to know where I've been. It taught my brother and his friend not to
go caving with me anymore." (Pete Jensen)
Source: Jensen, Pete. (1973) "Lost in Onyx Cave." Cave Crawler's Gazette. Vol.
XIV, No. 3, pp. 33-35.
Florida, Little River Springs


********** Sunday, 27 August 1972
Three New Jersey divers, Kenneth R. DeGrazia (23), Michael R. Williams (24),
and Robert Lewis Grauer (18) scuba dived into Little River Springs sometime Sun-
day. All three drowned. Grauer's body was accidently discovered at a depth of 60
feet and about 15 feet from the mouth of the cave. He had a knife wound an inch
wide and 2 inches deep in the stomach. The other two victims were about 10 feet
apart but 45 feet deeper into the cave.
Analysis: Williams was a diving instructor and was the most experienced of the trio;

---------- Page 10 ----------
Grauer the least. All three were experienced in open water diving, but it is believed
that they had little or no cave diving experience. The National Association for Cave
Diving had placed a sign near the spring warning of its dangers for novice divers. The
New Jersey group ignored the advice. They did not use safety lines, wore only single
tanks, and used inadequate, commercial lights.
Several possible explanations for Grauer's knife wound were given. His mother
stated it was just a scratch and probably happened at the funeral home. The Suwanee
County sheriff thought there had been a struggle for survival after one person ran out
of air and tried to take the air from one of his companions. The deputy sheriff
thought Grauer, being the least experienced, had panicked and the other diver had
tried to prod him along with the knife. A scuba shop owner speculated that Grauer
tried to escape from the diver with the knife. Any one of these explanations could
have happened; no one will ever know what really happened to the divers. It is clear
that all three underestimated the hazards of cave diving. These were the 14th, 15th.
and 16th drownings in this cave since 1960.
Sources: Anon. (1972) "3 Jersey Divers Found Dead; Were Exploring Florida Cave."
Clipping from unidentified newspaper.
Anon. (1972) 3 N.J. Divers Die in Cave; Cut Indicates Fight For Air." Philadelphia
Evening Bulletin. 29 Aug. 1972, p. 31.
Karasik, Ellen. (1972) "Did Carelessness Kill N.J. Trio Exploring Perilous Ocean [sic]
Cave?" Philadelphia Inquirer. 19 Sept. 1972, pp. 1. 6.
Sharp. Eric. (1972) "Underwater Cave Claims Ever-Growing List of Victims." Ann
Arbor News. 3 Sept. 1972, p. 11.
Anon. (1973) "Wat Ging Er Mis?" Speleo-Nederland Vol. 3, No. 2. pp. 10-12. (in
Dutch)
Georgia, Climax Cave
October 1972
Six people changed carbide, all dumping their spent carbide into a plastic bag.
When Tom Ross (20) climbed upon the rock where the carbide bag was setting, the
bag exploded in his face. There were no injuries.
Analysis: Acetylene fumes from spent carbide are hazardous.
Source: Report by Don Cooper
New Mexico, Fort Stanton Cave
October 1972
Phillip Neale, III (18), Rodger Mason, and two others had been caving all day in
Fort Stanton Cave. After resting at the top of Twenty Steps, they one at a time des-
cended the muddy slope. Neale, who was the last to descend, was about half way
down when he lost traction and twisted his foot. It was determined that his foot was
probably sprained or broken but it was not splinted. His three companions carried
him about a half mile to the entrance. Neale was taken to the hospital at Holloman
Air Force Base where it was learned that he had broken his foot.
Analysis: If Neale had been wearing proper boots instead of street shoes with crepe
soles, he probably would not have been injured. Even though the passage between
the site of the accident and the entrance was large walking passage, his foot should
have been splinted to prevent possible further injury.
Source: Report by Rodger Mason
West Virginia, Moyers Twin Wells


********** Sunday, 3 December 1972
Bruce W. Smith (24) on an impulse decided to check out Moyers Twin Wells. He
was alone and only the owner of the property knew he was in the cave.
The cave is small but has three pits which require rope; Smith explored these.
As he was leaving, he prusiked up the main shaft, a 75-foot drop, using the Texas
prusik method because it would be easier to negotiate the lip at the top. When Smith
was within 2 feet of the ledge, the Pierre Allain locking D carabiner holding his
diaper seat sling together unscrewed and flexed. The gate opened and released the
strap of his seat sling. Smith immediately turned upside down. His foot strap then
slipped off his foot and he fell about 67 feet to the bottom of the shaft.
Smith tightened into a ball as he fell, but he does not remember landing or feel-
ing any pain. The main impact of the fall was absorbed by his helmet. Smith later
conjectured that he landed in a crouched position with the impact points being his
head, left knee and right foot. He was probably unconscious for 15 to 30 minutes.
Upon regaining consciousness, Smith realized he had multiple cuts and bruises, and
he suspected that he had a broken foot, broken ribs, and a sprained neck.
Because he was alone, Smith decided to make another attempt at getting out
using the Texas prusik method again. He fastened his one remaining Jumar to his
left foot. From his belt, a 6-foot piece of 1-inch nylon webbing, Smith made a loop
which he fastened to the rope with a Bachmann knot. He used his last carabiner, a
non-locking SMC oval carabiner for his seat sling. All the rigging was done using
only the available light coming in the small hole at the top since Smith's lamp had
torn off during his fall and he carried no other light sources. Smith was able to
ascend the pit safely with his jury-rigged system. Smith had a small break in his
foot but no broken ribs. His neck was stiff for the next 3 months.
Analysis: "The caving alone was not a cause of the accident nor could it have
helped if there were other cavers along-quite the contrary, because of the size
of the shaft I would have only succeeded in falling on someone-hurting if not
killing them. The one light source was wrong, but in no way did I find it a hind-
erance to be without light. The blame must be with me and my failure to use some
accessories that would have helped prevent the fall. This is the third time that this
carabiner has failed on me, but never in a situation as described above. (Sentimental
attachment) I should have used a more reputable carabiner. If my foot loop had been
tighter it may have held, but maybe not. What would have saved me would have been
a chicken loop around my ankle." (Smith)
Since the American Caving Accidents were first compiled in 1967. this is the
first accident involving a solo caver. Smith showed poor judgement in caving alone.
having only one light source and using faulty equipment; however a less exper-
ienced caver could probably not have extricated himself from this predicament.
Source: Report by Bruce W. Smith

---------- Page 11 ----------
Texas, Fischer's Pit


********** Saturday, 30 December 1972
Henry Hernandez, Jr. (17), Michael Bruginan (15), and John Wheeler (16) learned
about the 110-foot deep Fischer's Pit from Mrs. Mabry, the owner of the cave. They
assured her that they were experienced cavers and knew what they were doing. The
boys managed to get down the first drop, supposedly using a crude rope ladder.
Hernandez then tried to negotiate the next drop by grabbing a 1/4-inch ski rope and
stepping over the ledge. He fell about 35 feet, landing on his head.
Mrs. Mabry notified the authorities at about 2 p.m. The boy was removed by
members of two fire departments by 4:25 p.m. He was in a coma and showed signs
of severe shock but died before getting to the hospital.
Analysis: The boys were inexperienced yet overconfident in their abilities. They did
not have the proper equipment for vertical caving.
Sources: Report by Glenn Darilek
Fleming, Steve. (1973) "Accident Report." The Texas Caver. pp. 37-38.
Texas, Dead Deer Cave
Sunday. 31 December 1972
On New Year's Eve. seven high school boys from San Antonio had to be rescued
by Civil Defense volunteers. The cave was posted but the youths entered without
permission. Three of the boys managed to climb a rope up the 75-foot shaft, but the
other four were too tired.
Analysis: The boys had no knowledge of the standard vertical techniques. This was
the second time within three years that a rescue was necessary for this pit: two sim-
ilar incidents followed in the first months of 1973.
Source: Anon. (1973) "Notice." The Texas Caver, p. 48.
Texas, Pumkin Pit
A large group of cavers from the University of Texas were practicing vertical
techniques in Pumkin Pit. The pit has a large, wide entrance which drops 50 feet to a
breakdown-covered floor. Since there were more people than sets of vertical gear,
equipment had to be passed up and down the rope. A set of equipment was accident-
ally dropped and it hit a caver below on the hand. The impact was hard enough and
startling enough to send him into shock. He remained seated, but when his compan-
ions tried to question him. he went limp and slumped to his side. He came back to
normal within a few minutes.
The fellow had probably gone into psychogenic shock where a sudden dilation
of the blood vessels momentarily interrupts the flow of blood to the brain causing
fainting. Fortunately when the body goes limp the blood supply to the brain
is
improved and the faint passes.
Analysis: Falling objects are one of the greatest hazards in exploring pits.
Source: Anon. (1973) "Accident-Pumkin Pit, West Texas," Inside Earth No. 1.
pp. 61-62.
Summary
This issue of American Caving Accidents contains the reports of 23 incidents
involving 37 persons.
The summary tables have been divided into two parts. The first part gives statis-
tics on the type of cave accidents. For each accident report there is one entry under
situation. month, and day of the week. Classification of accidents by cause and con-
tributory cause is open to a lot of subjective interpretation of the individual reports
since often an accident occurred only after a combination of events had taken place.
The second part of the summary tables deals with the accident victims. In each
category, there is one entry for each victim.
The day of the week the accident occurred and the sex of the victim are new
categories, but this information has been compiled from the older reports and is
reflected in the tables showing totals from 1967 to 1972.
Suggestions for improvement or modification of the summary or any part of this
report are welcome and should be addressed to the National Speleological Society
Safety and Techniques Committee, Cave Avenue, Huntsville, Alabama 35810.
1967-1972
ACCIDENTS
Situation
General
Vertical
Diving
Immediate Cause
Fall
Falling rock or object
Failure of rappel or prusik
Stumble
I
Exposure and/or exhaustion
Burns
Asphyxiation
Illness
Drowning
Animal attacks
Contributory Causes
Climbing unroped
Caving alone
Exceeding abilities (inexperience)
Inadequate equipment
Worn equipment
I
Bad weather (including flooding)
Exposure and/or exhaustion
Loosing way

---------- Page 12 ----------
Contributory Cause (cont'd)
1967-1972
Light failure
Party too large
Party separated
Getting stuck
Hurry
Poor judgement
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Unknown
Day of Week
Monday
I
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Unknown
ACCIDENT VICTIMS
Sex
Male
Female
Unknown
Age of individuals
"Boys or teenagers
Under 15
15-20
"Young or college age
21-25
26-30
31-35
Over 35
Unknown
Affiliation with Caving Group
1967-1972
Unaffiliated
Member of Caving Group
Unknown
Estimate of Experience
None or little
Moderate
Experienced
Unknown

---------- Page 13 ----------
Appendix
Florida Cave Diving
Fatalities
David Desautels
Introduction
Accidental drowning while SCUBA diving in submerged underground caves is a
major problem in North Central Florida. The unique topography in this area lures
divers from around the world to explore these crystal clear underground waters.
Dynamic young men, often equipped with little more than enthusiasm. enter these
caves only to be removed as lifeless victims. Recent retrospective studies have in-
vestigated diving accidents in general with some mention of cave diving accidents:
however, little information is available regarding the diving accidents involving under-
water caves. To learn more about the potential hazards of cave diving, a survey was
begun on January 1. 1960. This investigation is a continuing project of the Florida
State Board of Health, the National Association for Cave Diving and the Florida
Skin Divers Association. This data has been collected through the efforts of many
persons associated with these groups.
Method
Preliminary notification of an accident involving a diver in a cave is either
through newspaper articles or a call from the sheriff's office. Preliminary notifica-
tion is then followed up by a questionnaire report form mailed either to an official
or to a diver who was on the scene. This information, along with the coroner's
report, is then filed in an individual file. Often questionnaires are not returned,
and officials with no knowledge of diving accidents may confuse details. Obviously
the most complete information comes from the divers making the recovery or the
surviving divers on the scene. Their knowledge of equipment and its condition is
extremely valuable in completing the accident file. This file is reviewed annually
and a summary report is given at the Annual Seminar on Cave Diving sponsored
by the National Association for Cave Diving.
Results
Spanning a twelve-year period from January 1, 1960 to December 31. 1971,
there have been 79 deaths directly associated with diving in underwater caves.
Throughout the 12-year history of cave diving accidents there has been little change
from the average of 6.58 deaths per year, except in the year 1967 (see Figure 1).
*
Executive Director, National Association for Cave Diving
TOTAL 79 DEATHS
Figure 1. Florida Cave Diving Deaths VS. Year
This could possibly be an encouraging indication since the popularity of cave diving
has increased many fold without a parallel increase in cave diving deaths. The
reasons for the slight increases are unexplainable. Possible reasons for the absence
of a continual increase with the increase in diving popularity is the availability of
better diver education. especially the advent of cave diver education and the im-
provement of cave diving equipment. Until recently, most specialty equipment used
for cave diving was designed and built by the individual using it. This led to the
misuse of lights and lines and often resulted in divers becoming lost and running out
of air. Divers who are now entering caves are much better off than divers of the past
because of better cave diving equipment and training.
It is significant that the 79 cave diving deaths were the result of only 57 acci-
dents. This means that almost 40 percent of the cave diving accidents resulted in
more than one death. In all there have been 20 double drownings, one triple and
the worst accident in diving history-a Christmas vacation that ended the lives of
four University of Georgia students 300 feet into a cave. Two of these boys had
used diving equipment for the first time only the day before. Many would say that
this was the buddy system and its failure in the worst form. however it is probably
more a compounding of many errors made by both divers in their attempts to
keep up with each other.
Could maturity and judgement play a major role in these cave diving accidents?
It would appear from Table 1 that this is probably the case. Examining the table
closely one sees that the age group from 15 to 17 comprises 58 percent of the
total number of cave diving deaths. One step further indicates that 73 percent of
all cave diving deaths occur to young divers between the ages of 15 and 20, only
a six-year span. These are the divers who must be reached and educated about the
hazards of cave diving, Any cave diving instructor will tell you that maturity is
a
highly desirable characteristic in a cave diving student.

---------- Page 14 ----------
Table 1
Cave Diving Fatalities
Listed By Age
AGE
NUMBER OF FATALITIES
15-17
18-20
21-23
24-26
27-29
30-32
33-35
36-38
39-41
42-44
45-47
48-50
51-72
TOTAL
Other parameters which can be examined to determine patterns for these acci-
dents are: the month of the year, the day of the week, the location of the majority
of the accidents, and whether or not the victim was familiar with the environment.
Except for the case of the resident diver, these parameters all have the result one
would expect. Residents of Florida more often than the out-of-stater fall victim
to the Florida caves (see Table 2). However, a seasonal trend is indicated for acci-
dents involving non-residents (see Table 3). The tourist comes to Florida to try the
beautiful waters of the Sunshine State and instead of going to the Keys, he winds up
in the caves. Also, as would be expected, the majority of the accidents (65 percent)
happen on weekends when the majority of the dives are being made (see Table 4).
There seems to be a magnetic attraction for some people to tragedy, because
the more often people drown in a particular cave and the more publicity it arouses,
the more divers it attracts. Consequently the more popular dive sites are very benign
sites, yet they are the ones which claim the most lives (see Table 5). As would be
expected, most cave diving is being done in the Suwanee River and Santa Fe River
areas where the springs and sinks are heavily concentrated (see Figure 2).
Summary
The large percentage of cave diving deaths involves young, inexperienced divers,
who venture into popular cave diving locations with their buddy who is equally in-
experienced. They both go beyond the point of their capabilities only to have an
accident which could have been prevented by good judgement. There were 79
diving deaths in the twelve-year period between 1960 and 1971.
Table 2
Cave Diving Fatalities
Listed By Residence
Occurred
Occurred
Residency of Victims
in cave
in open waters
Total
Residents of Florida
Students
Military
Other
Total
Non-residents of Florida
Students
Military
Other
Total
Table 3
Cave Diving Fatalities
Listed By Month
Resident
Non Resident
victims
victims
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
TOTAL

---------- Page 15 ----------
Table 4
Cave Diving Fatalities
Listed by Day of the Week
DAY
CAVE FATALITIES
% OF TOTAL
Saturday
36.8
Sunday
28.9
Monday
5.3
Tuesday
0.0
Wednesday
18.4
Thursday
5.3
Friday
5.3
TOTAL
100.0
Conclusion
Cave diving can be a very safe and enjoyable sport when it is approached in the
proper manner with the correct training and equipment and mature judgement. Cave
diving has a reputation for being a hazardous sport; however, the primary reason
for this reputation is because of press sensationalism and the tendency for many
persons to exaggerate the number of accidents to reporters and other writers.
coc.

---------- Page 16 ----------
Region No. 1
Suwance River Area
Little River Spring
Peacock Slough
Manatee Spring
Rock Bluff Spring
Falmouth Spring
Santa Fe River Area
Jenny Spring
Hornsby Sink
Devils Eye Spring
Ichatucknee River Area
Jugg Hole Spring
Region No. 2.
Blue Spring (Volusia)
Ponce de Leon Spring
Region No. 3
Morrison Spring
*
Blue Springs (Holmes)
Region No. 4
Eagles Nest Sink
Blue Sink
Region No. 5
Blue Spring (Madison)
Dismal Sink
McBrides Slough
Wakulla Spring
1*
Region No. 6
Zuber Sink
Crystal River
1*
Blue Grotto
3**
Region No. 7
Blue Hole Pond
Mystery Sink
2*
*
Number classified as open water accidents
Figure 2. Diving Accidents Involving Springs and Sinks Classified By
Regions
SOCIETY L

---------- Page 17 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Accident Report Form
Date of Accident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name (s) of person (s)
Age
Sex
involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving
Accidents" is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
( ) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
( ) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver. weather, equipment. clothing.
etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( ) Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose copies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
Time:
State
Zip
Experience
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
Safety and Techniques Committee
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810
