
---------- Page 1 ----------
INDI News
American Caving Accidents
2004 - 2005

---------- Page 2 ----------
National Speleological Society
Accident/Incident Report Form
Date of Accident/Incident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
State
Name(s) of Person(s) Involved
Age
Sex
Experience
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible, obtain information from
those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of American Caving Accidents is ideal. The following checklist
is suggested as a guide for information to be included. You can also report accidents on the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca.
The Accident/Incident
( ) Names and ages of persons involved
() Events leading to accident/incident
( ) Location and conditions in cave
( ) Description of how the accident/incident occurred
() Nature of injuries sustained
( ) Analysis of main cause
() Contributory causes (physical condition of caver, weather, equipment, clothing, etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident?
Rescue or Response
) Actions taken following the accident/incident
( ) Persons or organizations contacted for help
( ) Details of rescue procedures
Further details were reported in (please list name and date of publication or source, and attach copies if possible):
Newspapers
Grotto Newsletter
Other (web site, television or radio station, etc.)
Please return the completed report to the NSS
National Speleological Society
as soon as possible after the accident.
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville AL 35810-4431
Time:
Country:
Telephone
Email
Country
Postal Code
Affiliation
Injuries or Comments

---------- Page 3 ----------
American Caving Accidents
2004-2005
American Caving Accidents
Editor
William O. Putnam
May 2007
1865 Eagle Summit Court
Lawrenceville GA 30043-6669
aca@caves.org
Features
ACA 2004-2005
Review Committee
An Overview of the 2004 and 2005 Incidents
Richard Blackburn
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics, 1986 2005
George Dasher
John Gookin
2004 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Kris Green
2004 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Dave Hughes
Becky Jones
2005 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Stephen Mosberg
Steve Ormeroid
2005 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Forrest Wilson
2004 and 2005 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Deadline: The NSS News is distributed the
Previously Unreported Incidents
last week of the month preceding the date of
publication. Ads, articles, and announce-
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
ments should be sent to the NSS News, Box
879, Angels Camp, CA 95222 by the 15th of
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
the month, six weeks before the month of
issue (e.g., material for March should be
2004 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
submitted by January 15).
2005 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
The NSS News (ISSN-0027-7010) is
published monthly, with the Members Manual
2004 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
and American Caving Accidents published
as additional issues by the National
2005 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
Speleological Society Inc., 2813 Cave Ave.,
Huntsville AL 35810-4431.
The National Cave Rescue Commission
Periodicals Postage Paid at Huntsville, AL
and additional mailing offices.
Contributing Authors and Photographers
Tel: (256) 852-1300
Fax: (256) 851-9241
Jeff Burns
Email: nss@caves.org
40 SE Helms Road
www.caves.org
Union Grove AL 35175
Regular membership in the NSS is $36 per
Pat Seiser
year. Subscriptions to the NSS News are $23
per year; individual copies are $1.50 each.
1106 Tracy Pl
Copies of American Caving Accidents are
Carlsbad NM 88220
also available from the NSS Bookstore for
$5.00 plus postage. Contact the Huntsville
office for membership applications,
subscriptions, orders, or for replacement of
issues missing or damaged in the mail.
Copyright © 2007
Front Cover
by the National Speleological Society Inc.
All rights reserved. No portion of this
NCRC students practice using hauling systems at a pit in Hughes Cave, Alabama,
publication may be reproduced without the
during the 2006 Southeastern Regional Seminar. Photograph Copyright © 2006 Jeff
written permission of the National
Burns.
Speleological Society.
Back Cover
Postmaster:
Send address changes to
Top: Students package a patient in a Sked litter during a mock rescue exercise at the
National Speleological Society
2005 NCRC National Seminar. Photograph Copyright © 2005 Patricia Seiser.
2813 Cave Ave.
Lower Left: Litter handling practice in Eudy Cave, Alabama, during the 2006
Huntsville AL 35810-4431
Southeastern Regional Seminar Photograph Copyright © 2006 Jeff Burns.
Lower Right: Moving a patient in Talucah Cave, Alabama, during the 2006
Southeastern Regional Seminar. Photograph Copyright © 2006 Jeff Burns.
Volume 65 Number 5, Part 2

---------- Page 4 ----------
An Overview of the 2004 and 2005 Incidents
American Caving Accidents (ACA) is the journal of record
for caving accidents and safety incidents in the United States
and North America. This issue contains reports for incidents
that occurred in 2004 and 2005. Following the custom of
previous issues, the reports have been separated into two
general categories: regular caving and cave diving, and then
further classified by result or outcome and by causes and
contributing factors. The cave diving incidents are grouped
separately, and an overview is presented at the end of this
section.
Since 1994, we have used the category "difficulty on
rope," to encompass such problems as becoming stuck at the
lip of a pit, clothing or hair caught in the rappel device,
jammed rappel safety, or simply becoming unable to ascend or
descend. Our intent is to better describe these situations, which
might otherwise be lumped under "stuck," "trapped/stranded,"
or perhaps "equipment problem."
In reporting the number of incidents versus NSS
membership totals, only caving incidents involving fatalities,
injury, or aid were included. The reader should also be aware
that the members of the National Speleological Society
constitute only a portion of the population of active cavers.
Further, not all incidents are reported to ACA. These numbers
should not be considered reliable indicators of accident rates
for caving or used to draw conclusions about the relative
degree of risk or danger involved in caving.
Incident Results
Fatalities
On average there are three or four fatal caving accidents in
North America each year. When incidents involving untrained
and inadequately equipped spelunkers 1 are excluded, the
average drops to one or two fatal accidents per year.
In 2004 there were three reported fatalities. The first
occurred in January at Cumberland Caverns, Tennessee, when
an adult youth group leader suffered a heart attack and died
during a guided cave trip. The second occurred in March at
Beware Cave, Utah, when a man drowned while exploring a
small spring cave at a swimming area. The third occurred in
December at Devils Punchbowl in the U.S. territory of Guam
when a man fell and was killed, apparently while climbing
down into the cave entrance.
Several caving-related incidents resulting in fatalities were
also reported in 2004. In January, a man was killed when he
apparently stumbled into a roadside pit near Rancho Cielo in
Tamaulipas, Mexico. A similar incident occurred in July at
Sotano de Xoconostle in San Luis Potosí. Another roadside pit
in Mexico was the scene of a fatality in April, when a man
reportedly committed suicide by jumping into Sotano de la
Garza, Puebla. Two fatalities were also reported involving
open-water divers at sea caves in Hawaii. In December, two
young boys were reportedly drowned in a cave entrance in
Chiapas, Mexico, after chasing an animal into the cave.
In the US, "cavers" generally consider "spelunkers" to be people who have
no real knowledge or understanding of caves and caving safety, but who
decide to enter a cave anyway, usually without proper equipment.
There were no fatal caving accidents reported for 2005, but
there were several caving-related incidents which resulted in
deaths. A diver drowned in May in a flooded quarry in
Vermont. In August, national attention was focused on a
tragedy at Y Mountain outside Provo, Utah, when four young
people drowned while exploring a partially flooded abandoned
mine. Also in August, another fatal accident involving a
roadside pit occurred in Mexico at Sotano de la Cochera.
Finally, in September a woman drowned in an underwater sea
cave at Kaanapali Beach, Hawaii.
In addition to the incidents just described, there were
several fatal cave diving accidents in 2004 and 2005. These
incidents are discussed in the appropriate sections below.
Injury and Aid
Incidents in this category resulted in injury to one or more
people, who then required help in order to exit the cave. While
many of these incidents involved rescue call-outs and outside
assistance, others were resolved by the cavers themselves
without calling for rescue.
Caver falls remain a leading cause of injury and rescue,
accounting for three of the seven incidents involving injury
and aid in 2004 and four out of the eight such incidents
reported for 2005. One fall occurred when a caver lost control
on rappel, but most involved cavers climbing without a belay
NSS Membership and
Number of Incidents
Year
Members
Incidents
Only incidents resulting in aid, injury, or fatality are
included. Membership figures include all classes of
membership.

---------- Page 5 ----------
or moving in exposed locations without a safety line.
Two incidents in 2004 involved cavers trapped or injured
by rockfall. In April, a caver was trapped by an entrance
collapse at Lost Fossil Cave in New Mexico. A caver was
pinned and injured by a passage collapse in Narrows Cave,
Colorado, in October.
A 2005 incident during an NCRC training event at Talucah
Cave, Alabama, involved a caver who was struck and injured
by falling rocks while being hauled out of a pit. Rockfall
entrapments also occurred at Empire Mine Cave, California
and Flowing Stone Cave, Georgia. In the latter incident,
passage collapse in a crawl at the top of a pit pinned one caver
and dropped large rocks onto cavers waiting at the bottom.
One caver suffered a dislocated shoulder in a cave in 2004
and another caver needed help exiting Spanish Cave in 2005
after injuring her knee while climbing a chimney. In each
case, the injured caver's companions managed a rescue.
In May, 2005, two cavers were rescued from a pit in
Tennessee after being stranded on rope for several hours. One
suffered suspension trauma and was hospitalized for several
days. In July, 2005, a caver was rescued from Alexander
Cave, Arkansas, after he suffered a heart attack and collapsed.
Aid, No Injury
Most incidents in this category are rescues of individuals
that cavers often refer to as "spelunkers" who are typically
poorly equipped and inexperienced, and are often stranded
when they break or lose their flashlights, run out of batteries,
descend pits hand-over-hand, or get lost. Sometimes, however,
even experienced and properly equipped cavers fall ill and
need assistance, or are trapped by rockfall or flooded passage.
In 2004, there were twelve reported incidents in which
cavers were unable to exit without assistance. Six involved
cavers who became stuck in tight passages. Only one of those,
a crevice entrapment at Narrows Cave, Colorado, involved an
experienced caver. A notable incident drew international
attention when six British cavers endured a multi-day flood
entrapment in a Mexican cave. Two incidents in 2004
involved poorly equipped spelunkers who became lost and
stranded underground. Another occurred when two children
left their group and became lost in Catacombs Cave at Lava
Beds National Monument, California. The two remaining
rescues involved a caver trapped overnight in Lost Fossil Cave
by entrance collapse and a tourist who fainted and had to be
evacuated from a cave tour at Oregon Caves.
In 2005, there were eight incidents in which trapped or
stranded cavers required assistance. Two similar incidents
involving cavers stuck in crevices occurred at Devil's Den
Cave, Arkansas in March and April. In May, a caver with a
chronic medical condition was rescued from Island Ford Cave
in Virginia. A second rescue at Island Ford Cave occurred in
August when a caver slipped and became stuck in breakdown.
Also in August, a caver was rescued from Ten Mile Pit in
Tennessee after descending the entrance pit hand-over-hand
and becoming stranded. Cavers were briefly trapped by
passage collapse in Empire Mine Cave, California, in
September and Flowing Stone Cave, Georgia, in October. In
both incidents, the trapped cavers were freed by their
companions. In December, two spelunkers lost for over 24
hours in Pettijohns Cave, Georgia, were rescued when they
were accidentally discovered by another caving party.
Injury, No Aid
These incidents resulted in injuries ranging from scrapes
and bruises to sprained ankles and broken legs. In each case,
the victim was able to exit the cave with minimal assistance
from members of the caving party.
There were no reported incidents of this type for 2004. In
2005, however, there were ten. Five involved caver falls,
resulting in various injuries. In each case the injured caver was
able to exit with minimal or no assistance. Four incidents
involved rockfall that caused injury. One incident involved a
caver who suffered hypothermia, exhaustion, and cold injuries
as a result of inadequate clothing and footwear during a trip
through Wyoming's Fossil Mountain Ice Cave.
No Consequence
These incidents are typically of the "near miss" category.
They are included SO that the reader will be aware of the many
things that can go wrong on a caving trip. Examples include
carabiners or maillon links coming unscrewed while on rope,
rockfall incidents and passage collapses not resulting in injury
or requiring aid, and individuals or groups who become lost or
stranded, but are eventually able to find their way out or
resolve their difficulties without assistance.
One incident of this type was reported for 2004, involving
two cavers who became lost in Peppersauce Cave, Arizona.
They had not left word of their plans, and no one knew they
were in the cave. After spending about 24 hours in the cave,
they were saved when one of the cavers found the route to the
entrance.
Incident Types
Acetelyne-related
No burns, explosions, or other acetylene-related incidents
were reported for 2004 or 2005. It may be that the wide
availability of affordable, high-quality electric headlamps has
largely displaced carbide lights in US caving.
Bad Air
None of the caving accidents and incidents reported in this
issue involved bad air. One caving-related incident involving
asphyxiation occurred in April, 2004, when several young
people were overcome by carbon monoxide in an abandoned
tunnel complex in St. Paul, Minnesota, known as the Wabasha
Street Caves. Three people died in that incident, which serves
as a grim and tragic illustration of the danger of building fires
in enclosed spaces such as caves or mines.
To learn more about the dangers and signs of bad air in
caves see Bill Mixon's article in the April, 2000, ACA, and
Bill Elliott's article in the December, 1997, ACA.
Caver Fall
Falls remain the leading type of safety incident or accident
in caving, accounting for a large proportion of reported
injuries and rescues. Five out of 22 reported incidents for 2004
and ten out of 26 reported 2005 incidents involved falls. Many
of the incidents could have been prevented by the use of a
belay. Cavers should consider using a belay whenever the
exposure of a climb or traverse is greater than a body length.
A belay should also be used when climbing or descending a
cable ladder.
Cavers also fall on occasion while moving through
"horizontal" passages, accounting for a number of accidents

---------- Page 6 ----------
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics
1986-2005
Result of Incident
Result
Fatality
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Consequence
Total
Incidents Involving
Fatality, Injury, or
Aid
Incident Type
Type
Caver Fall
Trapped/Stranded
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Difficulty on Rope
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Rockfall
Lost
Flooding
Hypothermia
Illness
Exhaustion
Drowning
Stuck
Bad Air
Acetylene-related
Equipment Problem
Other
Caving-related
Incidents
-
-
-
-
-
Cave Diving Incidents
Result
Fatality (one or more)
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Consequence
Total Diving Incidents

---------- Page 7 ----------
reported in this issue. Cavers can reduce the risk of falls by
wearing sturdy boots with lug soles and maintaining "three
points of contact" while moving through uneven terrain.
In April, 2004, a 15-year-old caver broke his leg in New
River Cave, Virginia, when he fell while climbing over
breakdown. He was able to get out of the cave with the help of
his companions. Also in April, a caver was injured in a pit
near Spokane, Washington, when she lost control of her rappel
and fell about 20 feet. In May, 2004, a caver suffered fractured
ribs when he slipped and fell while climbing a slope during a
mock rescue in Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico. In July,
2004, a caver was seriously injured in Ape Cave, Washington,
when he fell after jumping over a crevice. The December 2004
fatality at Devils Punchbowl, Guam, occurred when a man fell
at the cave entrance.
There were ten reported incidents involving caver falls in
2005. In January, a caver fell and was injured while getting on
rope at the top of a pit in Surprise Cave, New York. In
February, a caver was injured when she slipped and fell back
against a rock projection while traversing a stream canyon in
Breathing Cave, Virginia. Also in February, several cavers on
a trip in Sharps Cave, West Virginia fell at various
climbdowns in the cave, sustaining minor injuries and
delaying the group's exit from the cave. A woman was
rescued from Copperhead Cave, Arkansas in April after she
fell down a pit just inside the entrance.
In June, 2005, a caver was injured in a fall during a multi-
day trip in Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico. He suffered a
dislocated shoulder, but was able to leave the cave the next
day with some assistance from his companions. A caver was
injured in Meeks Triple Well during the 2005 NSS
Convention in July when he lost control of his rappel after
passing a knot. He was also able to make it out of the cave on
his own.
One inexperienced caver suffered minor injuries in a fall in
Greenville Saltpeter Cave in July, and another was rescued
after falling into breakdown and becoming stuck in Island
Ford Cave in August. An experienced caver fell in Green
Valley Cave, Alabama, in October, when a ledge collapsed
under his weight, and a caver carrying supplies to an
underground camp in Carroll Cave, Missouri, fell when his
heavy pack shifted, throwing him off balance as he crossed an
exposed slope.
Drowning
Drowning incidents are infrequent in "dry caving," but
have occurred when cavers became trapped by flooding or
when they attempted to free-dive through sumped passages.
One such fatality occurred in 2004 when a man exploring
Beware Cave in Utah without proper equipment apparently
became wedged in a low-airspace passage and drowned.
In caving-related incidents, however, several drownings
occurred. In August, 2004, a man was reported to have
drowned while "free diving" at a lava tube at Kiholo Bay,
Hawaii. In 2005 there were several drowning incidents. In
May, a man died while diving in a quarry near Rutland,
Vermont. In an incident which captured national attention,
four young people drowned in August, 2005, while exploring
an abandoned mine in Utah known locally as "Gollum's
Cave." In September, a snorkeler drowned in a sea cave at
Black Rock on Kaanapali Beach in Hawaii.
Equipment Problem
This catch-all category includes rigging failures, slipping
ascenders, light failure, rope failure, and misuse or lack of
equipment. There were no reported incidents of this type for
2004 or 2005.
Flooding
The only flooding incident reported for 2004 or 2005 was
the multi-day entrapment of a group of British cavers in Cueva
De Alpazat, Mexico, in March of 2004. In that incident, the
cavers were aware of the possibility of a lengthy entrapment
and had prepared by stocking an underground camp.
Unfortunately, the flooding lasted far longer than expected as
a series of storms moved through the area. The cavers were
eventually evacuated by divers, who escorted them through
the sumped passage one at a time.
The lesson taught by flood entrapments is simple: pay
attention to the weather conditions. Check the forecast for the
caving area, and be alert for the possibility of flooding. If the
cave is known to flood and you don't have a clear forecast, go
somewhere else. It's just not worth the risk of entrapment,
rescue, media attention, closed caves, injury, or death. For
more on the dangers of water caves, see George Dasher's
editorial in the June, 2003, ACA.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is usually a secondary result in the reported
incidents, occurring subsequent to cavers becoming injured,
stranded, or trapped in a cave. There were several incidents
involving lost or stranded cavers in which some of those
rescued required treatment for hypothermia. Remember:
hypothermia can kill you all by itself, but it also impairs your
thinking and judgment, making potentially deadly mistakes
more likely.
Hypothermia was a complicating factor in several reported
incidents involving cavers stuck in crevices or trapped by
rockfall. In February, 2004, a 14-year-old caver was rescued
and treated for hypothermia after being stuck for two hours in
a crevice in Sweet Potato Cave, Kentucky. In March 2004, a
caver stuck in a crevice in Cave of the Farside, Colorado,
became seriously ill due to hypothermia and dehydration
during his 16-hour entrapment.
In October, 2005, a caver was hospitalized and treated for
hypothermia and exhaustion after a trip through Wyoming's
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave. She lost her boots after removing
them to wade through a pool, and was forced to complete the
cave trip wearing sandals. The trip was prolonged when the
cavers had difficulty finding the route through to the lower
entrance, and the caver became hypothermic. She also
suffered cold injuries to her feet when she had to hike through
snow to get back to the vehicles after the group finally found
the way out of the cave.
Illness
There were no reported incidents of histoplasmosis
infections due to caving in 2004 or 2005. Two incidents in
2004 involved people who suffered heart attacks while in a
cave. In January, a man died from a heart attack during a
guided youth group trip in Cumberland Caverns, Tennessee.
In April, a woman was evacuated from a tour in Oregon Caves
National Monument after suffering an apparent heart attack.
In 2005, a woman was rescued from Island Ford Cave,
Virginia, after she became unable to exit due to a flare-up of

---------- Page 8 ----------
symptoms from multiple sclerosis. In July, a man was rescued
from Alexander Cave, Arkansas, after suffering a heart attack
in the cave.
Lost
Most of these incidents involve untrained and ill-equipped
cavers with little experience. Many escalate to the "stranded"
category when the batteries run out or flashlights get broken.
When found, lost cavers often require treatment for
hypothermia, sometimes including hospitalization.
A group of young people spent several days lost and
stranded in a lava tube cave at Cerro Estrella, Mexico, before
being found by searchers. They entered the cave with a few
candles and flashlights, and had not told anyone of their plans.
They were rescued after their families reported them missing
and their car was located near the cave. A similar ordeal was
narrowly avoided by an Arizona man and his son after they
became lost in Peppersauce Cave in June. They had not told
anyone of their caving plans before entering the cave, and
were lost for 24 hours before finding the way out.
In May, 2004, two young cavers were rescued from
Catacombs Cave, California, after they left their group and
took a wrong turn, accidentally heading deeper into the cave.
Upon reaching the cave entrance, the group leader noticed
their absence. After a lengthy search, the kids were found in
the terminal room of the cave.
Only one incident involving lost cavers was reported for
2005. In December, two cavers exploring Pettijohns Cave,
Georgia, were surprised when they came upon two other
cavers who had been lost and stranded in the cave since the
previous day. The lost cavers had not told anyone that they
were going to the cave, and had been looking for the way out
for about 24 hours. They were escorted to the surface.
Rockfall
As always, rockfall incidents accounted for several serious
accidents and incidents during the reporting period, resulting
in injuries and rescues as well as several cases of entrapment.
The most notable rockfall incidents were those in which
cavers were pinned or trapped in caves. Examples include the
October, 2004, incident at Narrows Cave, Colorado, in which
a caver was pinned for several hours when a large slab fell on
to his head and arm.
Stuck
Getting stuck is not usually much of a problem for
experienced cavers. Most of us have been stuck in a tight
passage at some point, and have learned that a calm head and
careful movement can usually remedy the situation.
Sometimes, however, extracting a stuck caver from a tight
passage or crevice can be extremely difficult. Incidents
reported in this issue include two at Nutty Putty Cave, Utah,
and three at Devils Den, Arkansas, which illustrate the serious
nature of crack and crevice rescues. Even experienced cavers
may sometimes get badly stuck, as demonstrated by the March
2004 incident at Cave of the Farside in Colorado.
Trapped/Stranded
This category is used to describe incidents in which the
caver or cavers were prevented from exiting the cave by
rockfall, light failure, lack of equipment, equipment failure, or
other causes. In many of the reported incidents, "spelunkers"
became stranded due to inexperience, inadequate equipment
and/or poor judgment. Examples include the cavers who were
stranded in a lava cave at Cerro Estrella in Mexico for several
days due to inadequate lights, as well as well as a group
stranded in Colorado's Bell Cavern in May, 2004. Tennessee's
Ten Mile Pit has been the scene of several incidents similar to
the August 2005 incident reported in this issue. Two boys
climbed down into the pit entrance without proper vertical
gear, and only one was able to climb back out.
Exhaustion
Several incidents have occurred in recent years involving
cavers who became exhausted while climbing, either on rope
or on cable ladders. This type of incident is potentially fatal
due to the rapid onset of harness-induced pathology (also
known as "harness-hang syndrome" or "suspension trauma").
Studies have shown that an immobile caver hanging on rope
can lose consciousness in a matter of minutes, with death
occurring soon after.
A number of articles on the subject are now available on
the Internet and can be found with any search engine. A 2002
report prepared by Paul Seddon for the British Health and
Safety Executive provides the most comprehensive review of
research and literature on the subject published to date.
Additional reports and information may be found on the
Internet by searching for the terms "suspension trauma,"
"harness-hang syndrome," and "harness pathology."
A serious incident of this type occurred in May, 2005, at
Raulston Pit, Tennessee. One caver became exhausted and
stranded on rope when he was unable to resolve a problem
with his climbing system and did not know how to perform a
changeover to get off rope. A companion got on rope and
climbed up to help, but also became stranded. Both cavers
were suspended on rope for several hours before rescuers
could come to the cave and pull them out of the pit. One caver
suffered serious injury from suspension trauma, and was
hospitalized for several days for treatment.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder
This category includes cavers who become stranded on
rope and require assistance, or who experience significant
difficulties and require assistance to complete their ascent or
descent. The Raulston Pit incident mentioned above was the
only reported incident of this type for 2004 or 2005.
Cavers involved in these incidents are often relatively
inexperienced and sometimes unfamiliar with their gear.
Others may be experienced cavers who are simply out of
practice or out of shape. Some incidents occur when cavers are
unable to deal with situations such as crossing the lip of a pit
with weight on the rope below, crossing an undercut or
overhanging lip, changing from rappel to ascent and vice
versa, or climbing a cable ladder.
Competent cavers must master their systems and know
how their equipment works. With practice, skilled cavers can
perform a change-over in less than 60 seconds. Spend some
time practicing; it could save your life.
Other
This catch-all category includes sinkhole collapse, cuts by
sharp rocks, dislocated shoulders, twisted ankles and other
joint injuries, animal attacks, and other incidents not covered
above, including drug labs, explosives, or bodies found in
caves. (Continued on page 8.)
2 http://www.hse.gov.uk/research/crr_pdf/2002/crr02451.pdf

---------- Page 9 ----------
Previously Unreported Incidents
Date
Cave
Location


********** March 10, 2001
Devils Den Cave
Arkansas


********** August 14, 2001
Lick Creek Cave
Montana


********** April 25, 2002
Colander Cave
Alaska
2004 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
23 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 24
Cumberland Caverns
Tennessee
February 27
Sweet Potato Cave
Kentucky
March 17
Cueva de Alpazat
Puebla, Mexico
March 20
Cave of the Farside
Colorado
March 23
Beware Cave
Utah
April 3
lava cave at Cerro Estrella
Mexico DF
April 8
New River Cave
Virginia
April 10
Oregon Caves
Oregon
April 18
Lost Fossil Cave
New Mexico
April 24
unspecified cave near Spokane
Washington
May 2
Fort Stanton Cave
New Mexico
May 14
Bell Cavern
Colorado
May 27
Catacombs Cave
California
June 17
Smiths Crack
Idaho
June 25
Peppersauce Cave
Arizona
July 5
Ape Cave
Washington
July 28
Long Cold Cave
Nevada
August 18
Devils Den Cave
Arkansas
August 20
Nutty Putty Cave
Utah
September 4
Nutty Putty Cave
Utah
October 9
Narrows Cave
Colorado
October 9
Waterworks Cave
Tennessee
December 1
Devils Punchbowl
Guam
2004 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
7 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 25
Forty Fathom Grotto
Florida
March 16
Cenote Dos Ojos
Yucatan, Mexico fatality
March 16
Nohoch Nah Chich
Yucatan, Mexico fatality
April 8
Cueva Oztoquito
Puebla, Mexico
June 12
Eagles Nest
Florida
August 21
Devils Ear
Florida
December 9
Sac Actun
Yucatan, Mexico two fatalities
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rockfall
Result
Incident Type
fatality
illness, heart attack in cave
aid, no injury
stuck, hypothermia
aid, no injury
flood entrapment
aid, no injury
stuck, hypothermia, dehydration
fatality
drowning
aid, no injury
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
illness, fainted in cave, heart problems
aid, no injury
rockfall entrapment
injury and aid
caver fall, lost control on rappel
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
lost
aid, no injury
stuck
no consequence
lost
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
rockfall entrapment
aid, no injury
stuck
aid, no injury
stuck
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
rockfall entrapment
injury and aid
dislocated shoulder in cave
fatality
fell into pit entrance
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
lost consciousness
lost consciousness, contaminated gas
lost consciousness, contaminated gas
fatality
cause unknown
two fatalities
siltation, lost guideline, out of air
fatality
no guideline, out of air
lost, out of air

---------- Page 10 ----------
2005 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
26 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 15
Surprise Cave
New York
February 19
Breathing Cave
Virginia
February 19
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
March 5
Devils Den Cave
Arkansas
April 9
Devils Den Cave
Arkansas
April 23
Copperhead Cave
Arkansas
May 14
Raulston Pit
Tennessee
May 29
Island Ford Cave
Virginia
June 8
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
June 11
Hellhole
West Virginia
June 29
Talucah Cave
Alabama
July 5
Meeks Triple Well
Alabama
July 21
Greenville Saltpeter Cave
West Virginia
July 23
Big Manhole Cave
New Mexico
July 28
Alexander Cave
Arkansas
August 2
Island Ford Cave
Virginia
August 2
Ten Mile Pit
Tennessee
August 13
Spanish Cave
Colorado
August 20
Ellisons Cave
Georgia
September 24
Empire Mine Cave
New Mexico
October 1
Green Valley Cave
Alabama
October 2
Lost Creek Cave
Tennessee
October 7
Flowing Stone Cave
Georgia
October 29
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave
Wyoming
November 5
Carroll Cave
Missouri
December 4
Pettijohns Cave
Georgia
2005 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
4 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 4
Peacock Springs III
Florida
May 12
Devils Eye
Florida
August 19
Dogwood Spring
Florida
September 11
Eagles Nest
Florida
(Continued from page 6.)
Cave Diving Incidents
In 2004, there were seven reported cave diving incidents.
Three occurred in Florida, and the rest occurred in Mexico.
Two of the incidents resulted in double fatalities, five resulted
in single fatalities, and one resulted in the rescue of a cavern
diver who lost consciousness under water. Factors
contributing to these incidents included contaminated or
improper breathing gas, lack of a guideline, and a route-
finding error that led to an out-of-air situation.
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stuck
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
stranded on rope, suspension trauma
aid, no injury
illness, stranded
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rockfall
injury and aid
rockfall
injury, no aid
caver fall, lost control on rappel
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rockfall
injury and aid
illness, heart attack in cave
aid, no injury
caver fall, stuck
aid, no injury
stranded, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
injured knee while climbing chimney
injury, no aid
rockfall
aid, no injury
rockfall entrapment
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
rockfall
aid, no injury
rockfall entrapment
injury, no aid
lost, hypothermia
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
lost
Result
Incident Type
fatality
diving beyond training, lost, out of air
no consequence
equipment problem
fatality
free diving in cave
injury and aid
incorrect gas mixture, out of air, rapid
decompression
Four cave diving incidents were reported in 2005. All took
place in Florida, with fatalities occurring during dives at
Peacock Springs III and Dogwood Spring. A diver was
seriously injured at Eagles Nest sink when she passed out
underwater due to an incorrect gas mixture and was brought to
the surface without undergoing decompression. Factors
contributing to these incidents included diving beyond
training, following the wrong guideline, free-diving in a cave
entrance, and improper gas mixture. One report involved a
diver who successfully exited despite a leaking air tank.

---------- Page 11 ----------
2004 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
19 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 10
unnamed cave at La Joya
San Luis Potosí,
Mexico
January 18
unnamed pit near Rancho del Cielo Tamaulipas,
Mexico
January 18
unnamed sinkhole near Apopka
Florida
February 23
unspecified Warren County cave
Kentucky
March 22
Wabasha Street Caves
Minnesota
March 26
unnamed sea cave on Oahu
Hawaii
April 15
Sotano de La Garza
Puebla, Mexico
April 26
unspecified cave near Oden Ridge
Alabama
April 27
unnamed sea cave on Highway 1
California
April 27
Wabasha Street Caves
Minnesota
May 13
sea cave at Panther Beach
California
June 21
unspecified cave on Lewis Peak
Utah
June 28
McFails Cave
New York
July 3
Climax Cave
Georgia
July 11
Sotano de Xoconostle
San Luis Potosí,
Mexico
August 4
unspecified lava tube, Kiholo Bay
Hawaii
August 23
Matacanes Canyon
Nuevo Leon,
Mexico
October 31
unnamed cave near Jochib
Chiapas, Mexico two fatalities
December 14
unnamed cave near Scottsville
Kentucky
2005 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
11 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
February 2
Waterman Mountain Bat Cave
Arizona
April 14
abandoned limestone mine
Kansas
May 18
Stephens Gap Cave
Alabama
May 29
abandoned quarry near Rutland
Vermont
August 18
Sotano de la Cochera
San Luis Potosí
August 18
Gollums Gave
Utah
September 18
sea cave at Black Rock, Kaanapali
Hawaii
October 17
unspecified cave at Peak's Corner
Alabama
October 21
unnamed lava tube on Kilauela
Hawaii
November 14
Panther Cave
Tennessee
December 14
Cato Cave
Tennessee
Acknowledgments
As always, we are all indebted to the people who have contributed reports for this issue. Their willingness to share their experiences
makes ACA a valuable resource for all cavers. Several notable correspondents have contributed a substantial portion of the material for
these reports. They include: Richard Breisch, George Dasher, Bill Halliday, Cindy Heazlit, Buddy Lane, Chuck Porter, and Bill
Torode. Many valuable comments, corrections, and suggestions were provided by reviewers Richard Blackburn, George Dasher, John
Gookin, Kris Green, Dave Hughes, Becky Jones, Stephen Mosberg, and Forrest Wilson. Additional proofreading assistance was
provided by Kris Green, Dave Hughes, and Laura Putnam.
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
fall outside cave entrance
fatality
fall into roadside pit
injury and aid
woman swallowed by sinkhole
no consequence
drug lab found in cave
no consequence
explosives found in old tunnels
fatality
cause unknown
fatality
suicide in pit
no consequence
lost, overdue
no consequence
car washed into sea cave after accident
three fatalities
asphyxiated by carbon monoxide in
tunnel
aid, no injury
stranded in sea cave by rising tide
aid, no injury
stranded in cave entrance on cliff
no consequence
dog stranded in cave
injury, no aid
attacked by wasps at cave entrance
fatality
fell into pit beside trail, intoxication
fatality
drowned while free diving in lava tube
injury and aid
fall, broken ankle on caving and
canyoneering trip
children stranded in cave, apparently
drowned
no consequence
dog stranded in cave
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
killer bee attack at cave entrance
no consequence
lost, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall outside cave
fatality
drowned while diving in quarry
fatality
fell into pit beside trail
four fatalities
drowned in abandoned mine
fatality
drowned while snorkeling
no consequence
meth lab found in cave
injury and aid
fell into lava tube entrance
aid, no injury
dog stranded in pit
no consequence
marijuana farm found in cave

---------- Page 12 ----------
Previously Unreported Incidents


********** 10 March 2001
Devils Den Cave, Arkansas
stuck in crevice
Kenny Nelson (14) was exploring Devils Den on a
Saturday outing with a church group. At about 11:30 a.m.,
while exploring in an area known as Satans Maze, Nelson
slipped and became wedged in a 12-inch-wide, 15-foot-deep
crevice. He was lying on his side, and could not move in any
direction. When they were unable to get Nelson out of the
crack, members of the group left the cave to get help.
Park rangers responded, and called in local cave rescue
team members to assist. Nelson's horizontal position made it
difficult for the rescuers as they attempted to get ropes around
him and lift him. They struggled for several hours, but made
little progress in extricating Nelson from the crevice.
Changing tactics, the rescuers decided to apply grease to
see if that would help Nelson move sideways in the crack.
With encouragement, Nelson was eventually able to slide
forward, inching his way out of the crevice. Once free, he was
able to walk out on his own, exiting at about 6:00 p.m. He was
stuck in the crevice for about five hours.
1. Steven Bonds, "Rescue squad saves teen trapped at Devil's
Den," Northwest Arkansas Times, 11 March 2001.
2. Steven Bonds, "Rescue squads save stuck teen spelunker,"
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, 11 March 2001.
Comments: Park officials noted that a similar incident had
occurred in the same area about 13 years earlier. Crack and
crevice problems are among the most difficult in cave rescue.
Many useful techniques have been developed and are taught
by the National Cave Rescue Commission.


********** 14 August 2001
Lick Creek Cave, Montana
caver fall, inadequate equipment
Jennifer Rocheleau (19), Chris Castle (19), Vanessa
Rocheleau (17), Andrew Castle (17), and Derek Lute (17)
entered the main entrance of Lick Creek Cave and soon
arrived at the top of a 15-foot climb-down. The drop was
rigged with a knotted rope, which Chris Castle descended
hand-over-hand. Jennifer Rocheleau followed. As she lowered
herself down the rope, her sweatshirt became snagged on one
of the knots. Rocheleau struggled to free herself, but lost her
grip and fell about ten feet to the breakdown below.
Castle rushed to her aid while the other three cavers found
an alternate route to the bottom. Lute, who had trained as a
medical specialist with the National Guard, assessed
Rocheleau's condition. She was conscious, felt severe pain in
her back and pelvis, could feel and move her arms and legs,
but was unable to stand or walk.
After some discussion, the cavers decided that it would be
safe to move Rocheleau and that they should get her out of the
cave and to a hospital. Chris Castle crawled toward the
entrance, carrying Rocheleau on his back until the passage
was large enough for the others to help. Rocheleau's
companions then took turns carrying her out of the cave and to
their vehicle. They drove her to a hospital, where she was
found to have several fractured vertebrae and a fractured
pelvis. In a six-hour operation, five of her vertebrae were
fused and her pelvic fracture was repaired. She was reported to
be in good condition following the surgery.
1. Steve Allum, Incident report, 1 August 2004.
2. Jennifer Perez, "Friends rescue teen after fall in cave,"
Great Falls Tribune, 22 August 2001.
Comments: Handlines and knotted ropes such as this one
provide a false sense of security. They may seem simple and
safe, but small diameter ropes and webbing are difficult to
grip. Many cavers lack the strength necessary to hang on and
prevent a fall if their feet slip. The cavers might have avoided
the accident by using a belay, or by searching for an alternate
route down before committing to the exposed climb.
The decision to move a person who has fallen and has a
back injury is a very serious one, involving the risk of spinal
cord damage that may result in paralysis or death. If you are
not trained in evaluating potential spinal injuries and in
moving a person who may have one, and there are no
immediate threats that require you to move the person out of
danger, it is usually best to keep the person still, take steps to
prevent hypothermia, and send for help.
Cave and mountain rescue teams almost always have
spinal stabilization equipment including cervical collars, spine
splints, and backboards, as well as personnel trained in their
use. These devices, when used by trained personnel, can
greatly reduce the risk of additional injury during the rescue.
Allum reports that the cave is very popular with "flashlight
cavers" lacking proper equipment. The climb-down is a short
distance inside the main entrance and can be avoided by using
a smaller entrance a few feet from the main one.


********** 25 April 2002
Colander Cave, Alaska
rockfall injury
Kevin Allred, Jean Krejca, and Terry Brown went to
Colander Cave on a survey trip during the 2002 Coronation
Island Expedition. They moved a boulder that was blocking a
drafty side passage, and began to survey. The passage
continued as a chimney leading upward. Brown climbed to the
top and Allred followed. As he climbed the chimney, a flake
of rock that Allred was using as a handhold came loose. Allred
quickly moved his hand to another hold, but the flake fell on
his little finger severely cutting the tip and exposing the bone.
Allred cleaned the wound as much as he could and headed
out of the cave and back to camp, where Krejca used the
expedition medical kit to sew up the nearly-severed fingertip.
Allred took a few days off from caving to allow the finger to
begin healing, and after that wore a glove to protect it.
Kevin Allred, "Coronation Island Expedition 2002 Log," The
Alaskan Caver, v24n3, July 2004.
Comments: Fortunately for Allred, the expedition was
equipped with a good medical kit, and one of the members had
experience in suturing wounds.

---------- Page 13 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 24 January
Cumberland Caverns, Tennessee
fatality, heart attack in cave
During an overnight camping trip in Cumberland Caverns,
members of a scout group were about three-quarters of the
way through the customary wild tour loop in the cave when
one of the adult leaders, Bill Domin (47), began experiencing
chest pain and collapsed. Another scout leader and a
Cumberland Caverns guide began administering CPR while
other members of the group left to get help. When paramedics
arrived, they used an automatic external defibrillator (AED)
but were not able to revive Domin. He was pronounced dead
at the scene. Cave rescuers and caverns staff members carried
his body from the cave.
1. Buddy Lane, Incident report, 25 January 2004.
2. Kris Beckwith, Incident Report, 29 September 2006.
Comments: It was later determined that Domin had suffered a
massive heart attack. Cumberland Caverns guides are trained
in first aid and CPR, and some have completed NCRC training
as well.


********** 27 February
Sweet Potato Cave, Kentucky
stuck, hypothermia
Jesse Gott (14) was exploring Sweet Potato Cave with his
scout troop when he slipped and became wedged "up to his
chest" in a crevice about 200 feet from the cave entrance.
According to Andrew Duncan, one of the scout leaders, "He
just went into this tight spot and got stuck. We tried to get him
out, but he was just squeezed." Duncan and four other scouts
stayed with Gott while others went to summon assistance.
Firefighters and rescue squad members worked to enlarge
the constriction and were able to free Gott from the crack at
about 3:00 p.m. He had been stuck for about two hours. Gott
was taken to a local hospital where he was treated for mild
hypothermia and released.
Associated Press, "Boy Scout rescued after being trapped in
cave," Louisville Courier-Journal, 29 February 2004.
Comments: Youth group leaders who plan to take their young
people caving should consider obtaining NCRC training in
addition to first aid and CPR. BSA guidelines for caving,
along with other information for youth group leaders, is
available on the NSS web site at http://www.caves.org/youth.


********** 17 March
Cueva de Alpazat, Puebla, Mexico
flood entrapment, international incident
Six members of a British caving expedition were trapped
for eight days in Cueva de Alpazat when heavy rains flooded a
100-meter section of the cave 500 meters inside the entrance,
preventing their exit. Jonathan Sims, Charles Milton, Simon
Cornhill, Chris Mitchell, John Roe, and Toby Hamnett were
members of the Combined Services Caving Association
(CSCA), a caving club for current and former members of the
British armed services. They had entered the cave system on
March 15 during a 4-week, club-sponsored expedition known
as Cuetzalan Tiger 2004. The group had been systematically
exploring and surveying the cave for several years in
cooperation with Mexican and other international caving
groups, using underground camps to support survey trips deep
into the extensive system.
The expedition members were well aware that the entrance
section of the cave is prone to flooding, sometimes taking as
much as a week to re-open after heavy rainfall. Taking this
into consideration, they had established Camp 1 in a dry
passage about one kilometer into the cave and stocked it with
enough food and supplies to allow a group to comfortably wait
out any flood entrapment. The flood-prone section was also
pre-rigged with a guideline to facilitate entry and evacuation
by cave divers if necessary. Communications to the surface
were provided using a low-frequency cave radio system.
On the evening of March 17, a group of three cavers
entered the cave, planning to relieve the six cavers already in
the cave and continue the survey. About 500 meters into the
cave, they discovered that the route was flooded and
impassable. The cavers returned to the surface and reported
the problem to the expedition leaders, who contacted the in-
cave party at Camp 1 by radio to discuss the situation. The
only viable course was to wait for the water level to drop, but
there was little concern since the trapped cavers were
comfortable and well-prepared.
Over the next few days the water level began to drop, as
expected, but the weekend brought more rain. For several
days, storms continued to move through the area, and the exit
passages remained flooded. Mexican authorities and rescue
groups offered support and assistance, including divers. The
available divers were not trained in cave diving, however, and
it was ultimately decided that the conditions were too
dangerous for divers lacking specialized training and
equipment. Expedition members called home to contact the
British Cave Rescue Organization and request assistance. Two
British cave divers who were familiar with the system flew to
Mexico with their equipment on March 23. Upon arrival, they
began preparing to take in supplies or to bring the trapped
cavers out through the sump if the flooding did not abate.
Word of the cavers' predicament spread, and reporters
gathered to cover the story. With little activity to report, the
media accounts soon turned to rumor and speculation. Press
reports stated erroneously that the cavers had refused help
from Mexican divers and rescuers, and had insisted on waiting
for British divers. Reporters and readers did not understand
the need for special training and equipment, or that the trapped
cavers were in no real danger, and viewed the expedition with
suspicion and resentment. Descriptions of the British cavers as
soldiers engaged in a military training exercise fueled public
outrage and drew government attention to the expedition.
Further concerns were raised when the expedition's
equipment for radon gas testing was mentioned, and media
reports suggested that the cavers might be secretly prospecting
for uranium. As the days passed, speculation and rumor

---------- Page 14 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
spiraled out of control, driven by national pride, inaccurate
reporting, and ill-founded statements by British and Mexican
officials. The incident came to a head when the president of
Mexico lodged a formal diplomatic protest and demanded an
explanation from the British government. Unaware of the
diplomatic storm raging outside, the trapped cavers passed the
time playing cards, checking the water level, and sleeping.
The water in the sumped passage remained high, and the
inclement weather continued. Finally, on March 25, British
cave divers Rick Stanton and Jason Mallinson were able to
traverse approximately 100 meters of flooded passage and
reach the trapped cavers at Camp 1. They were found to be in
good condition, as expected, but were anxious to leave the
cave. Over the next nine hours, the two divers escorted each of
the six trapped cavers through the flooded section. Once
through the sump, the cavers were able to exit without
assistance.
They emerged into a circus of international media
attention, public indignation, and diplomatic sparring, and
were escorted to a military hospital in Puebla for examination.
None of the cavers reported any ill effects, other than
boredom, from their stay underground.
1. Catherine Bremer, "Britons trapped in Mexican caves,"
Reuters, 24 March 2004.
2. "British cavers rescued in Mexico," BBC News World
Edition, news.bbc.co.uk, 26 March 2004.
3. "Mexico expels British explorers," CNN.com, 29 March
2004.
4. "Protesta Fox por la presencia de militares británicos en
Puebla," Milenio.com, 24 March 2004.
5. "Expelled cavers return home to UK," BBC News World
Edition, news.bbc.co.uk, 30 March 2004.
6. "Cuetzalan Tiger 2004," UK Caving Forum,
www.ukcaving.com, 24 March 2004.
7. "Cuetzalan Expedition," CSCA Bulletin Board, www.cs-
caving-association.com 26 March 2004.
Comments: The entrapment and rescue developed into an
international incident when miscommunications, rumors, and
inaccurate media reports sparked official and public
indignation in Mexico. Most of the cavers were current or
former members of the British armed services, and their
expedition was described as a military training exercise.
Apparently, this description had been used at home to help
justify the trip as something more than just a holiday for the
cavers. Unfortunately, statements by the expedition leaders
and by British officials fed Mexican perceptions of foreign
soldiers conducting a clandestine military operation in
Mexico.
Immediately after the successful completion of the rescue,
all 13 members of the expedition were arrested and detained
by Mexican authorities on suspicion of immigration and other
violations. They were held in Mexico City for three days while
an investigation was conducted. In the end, the cavers were
charged with failure to reveal the "scientific" nature of their
trip and failure to obtain special visas required for scientific
research and exploration, and were expelled from Mexico.


********** 20 March
Cave of the Farside, Colorado
stuck, hypothermia, dehydration
Rob Gillespie (38) and two companions entered Cave of
the Farside on a Saturday evening to continue work on a
digging project. The cave is near Glenwood Caverns, a well-
known commercial cave, and the cavers hoped to make a
connection to the larger system. They descended about 80 feet
into the cave entrance using a home-made ladder installed
earlier, and then traveled through about 200 feet of breakdown
passage to a 20-foot handline climb up to the dig site.
Shortly before midnight, Gillespie squeezed into a body-
sized fissure near the face of the dig to get to the work area.
As he did so, he slipped down into the crack and became
wedged. He could not move forward, and a rock pressing
against his knee prevented him from backing up. His left arm
was wedged underneath him at an awkward angle, and he
could not lift himself enough to move in either direction. He
was stuck, lying slightly head-down in the sloping fissure.
Gillespie's companions attempted to help, but the opening
of the passage was very narrow and would only allow one
person to reach his feet. For several hours the two cavers tried
everything they could think of to help Gillespie, but could not
free him from the crack. Finally, at about 7:30 a.m. Sunday
morning, one of the cavers left to get help and contacted Tim
Ray, a caver who had just arrived for work at Glenwood
Caverns. Ray called Glenwood Caverns owner Steve Beckley,
who notified the local fire department and the Colorado Cave
Rescue Network while Ray gathered some tools and headed to
the cave.
As the call for help went out and rescuers made their way
to the site, Ray and the other cavers tried in vain to extract
Gillespie. As more help arrived, they yielded to fresh rescuers,
who used drills, wedges, and other rock-breaking equipment
to try to enlarge the fissure and remove obstructions. Despite
these efforts, Gillespie could wiggle around but still could not
move forward or backward. By mid-afternoon Gillespie was
exhausted and hypothermic. He had also become nauseous,
and had vomited. His condition continued to deteriorate, and
he was becoming unresponsive.
At about 4:10 p.m., Daniel Laos, who was the only person
small enough to squeeze into the fissure, was finally able to
reach Gillespie and help him just enough to allow him to slide
back out of the crevice. Rescuers gave Gillespie some food
and drink and allowed him to rest for about 30 minutes,
massaging his arm to restore feeling. Eventually, Gillespie
was able to make his way out of the cave largely under his
own power, stopping a couple of times to rest and drink more
fluids. He exited the cave at about 5:30 p.m. after a 16-hour
entrapment. He was exhausted and dehydrated, but uninjured
by the ordeal.
1. Steve Reames, Incident report, 26 March 2004.
2. Phil Kriz, Press release, 25 March 2004.
3. Richard Rhinehart, "Durango Caver Rescued After 18-
Hour Underground Ordeal," Rocky Mountain Caving,
v21n1, Winter 2004, pp. 8-9.
4. Tim Ray, "The Rob Gillespie Rescue," Rocky Mountain
Caving, v21n1, Winter 2004, pp. 8-9.

---------- Page 15 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
5. Greg Masse, "Caver rescued from tight spot," Glenwood
Springs Post Independent, 25 March 2004.
6. Owen S. Good, "Caver is freed from tight spot," Rocky
Mountain News, 25 March 2004.
7. Wayne Harrison, "Colorado Cave Stuck 18 Hours In
Passageway," TheDenverChannel.com, 24 March 2004.
Comments: Crack and crevice entrapments are among the
most serious and difficult cave rescue problems. Constant
contact with cold rock, combined with the inability to move or
take food and water, can cause life-threatening hypothermia
and dehydration. Extended entrapments have resulted in a
number of deaths - the most notable being that of Floyd
Collins. No one wants to call out a rescue needlessly, but
cavers should remember that the clock is working against a
trapped caver. The critical resource for many stuck cavers is a
small, experienced, and aggressive caver.


********** 23 March
Beware Cave, Utah
fatality, drowning
Jesus Chauarria Manriquez (34) was on an outing with
family and friends at Crystal Ball Cave, a commercial cave
near Gandy. Another nearby cave, known to cavers as Beware
Cave, is the source of a spring that forms a popular swimming
spot called Warm Creek Springs. While swimming in the
spring pool, Manriquez decided to have a look inside the cave.
After a brief solo entry, Manriquez came out and
encouraged friends to join him in exploring the passage. Inside
the cave, they "collected some rocks," and the other members
of the group carried them out while Manriquez remained to
"collect" more. When Manriquez failed to return to the
surface, family members alerted the cave managers and asked
for help.
Rescuers entered the cave and soon found Manriquez'
body. He had drowned, and his body had become wedged in
the passage by the force of the water.
1. Peter Ruplinger, Incident report, 27 January 2006.
2. "Man Drowns in Underground Cave, Salt Lake Tribune,
24 March 2004.
Comments: Ruplinger reports that the cave is about forty feet
long and that there is adequate breathing space above three to
four feet of water for most of its length. About ten feet into the
cave, the passage is partially blocked by a veil of stalactites
that can only be passed by submerging.


********** 3 April
lava cave at Cerro Estrella, Mexico DF
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
Juan Manuel Gomez Urrutia (20), Roberto Carlos
Mendosa Gomez (24), Maria de los Angeles Huesca (22), and
Erika Sierra Lopez (20) were rescued from a lava tube cave at
Cerro Estrella near Iztapalapa on Wednesday, April 7, after
being stranded underground for more than three days. The
young people had entered the cave around midnight on
Saturday equipped with only one light, some candles and
matches, and some fruit juice and water. Shortly after entering
the cave they became lost and could not find their way out.
When their light failed and the candles were expended, they
were stranded. They spent the next three days in darkness.
When they did not return home by Monday, friends and
relatives became concerned and reported them missing. The
cavers had not told anyone where they were going, and it was
not until Tuesday evening that their vehicle was discovered
parked near Cerro Estrella, an extinct volcano cone with a
number of lava caves. Authorities and volunteers began
searching the area and caves. Sixteen hours later the stranded
cavers were discovered about 300 meters inside one of the
caves and were brought to the surface. All were suffering from
dehydration and hypothermia. They were taken to area
hospitals for treatment.
1. "Rescatan a extraviados en cuevas de Iztapalapa,"
EsMas.com, 7 April 2004.
2. "After Brits, lost Mexicans spend four days in cave,"
Reuters, 8 April 2004.
Comments: Always tell someone where you are going and
when you'll be back. Every caver should carry at least three
independent light sources, each sufficient to last the duration
of the trip. At least one light, and preferably all, should be
capable of being helmet-mounted to leave the caver's hands
free. Candles are not an appropriate light source for caving.


********** 8 April
New River Cave, Virginia
caver fall, broken leg
Cheryl Jones (51), Jerry Redder (51), Scott Jones (15), and
Tyler Jones (15) had spent several hours exploring New River
Cave and had just started for the entrance when they came to a
breakdown pile beside the stream passage near the back of the
cave. Tyler and Scott climbed up and over a large block, rather
than duck underneath. As Tyler crossed over the top, he lost
his footing and slipped, sliding about eight feet down the face
of the block. During the fall, he struck his shin against a rock
edge, causing a severe contusion and a transverse fracture of
his tibia.
The other cavers went to Tyler's aid. They examined his
leg and found that there was no bleeding or obvious
displacement of the bone. Tyler could not stand to put weight
on it, and the cavers could not be sure whether or not it had
been fractured. The cavers treated Tyler for shock, keeping
him warm while they wrapped his lower leg in gauze and
fashioned a splint using a hard plastic knee pad and a foam
knee and shin pad. Tyler took some Ibuprofen to help reduce
the pain and swelling.
The initial plan was to help Tyler move to a drier and more
comfortable area away from the stream. Once the cavers
started moving, however, Tyler found that he could make slow
but reasonable progress on three limbs with support and
assistance from the other cavers. Crawling and hobbling, he
continued toward the entrance. The cavers reasoned that as
long as Tyler was in good condition and moving toward the
entrance, this made more sense than keeping him immobile
and sending for help. They decided to continue, obstacle by
obstacle, and stop if it became necessary. In that event, Tyler
would at least be that much closer to the surface when rescuers
arrived.

---------- Page 16 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Fortunately, the cave passages become larger and easier
along the way, and the pain and stiffness in Tyler's leg abated,
SO they were able to keep moving. The trip out took about
seven hours of careful, unhurried caving, including several
stops for food and rest. The party reached the surface about 15
minutes before the "call-out" time that they had left with
fellow cavers, and phoned to tell them what had happened and
that they were out of the cave. They reported the incident to
the cave owner and drove Tyler to a hospital for treatment.
Cheryl Jones, Incident report, 13 April 2004.
Comments: Tyler was wearing good-quality, lug-soled hiking
boots and had been on several previous caving trips. Accidents
like this can happen to any of us in any cave. The cavers were
well prepared, with first aid supplies and training, as well as
appropriate clothing and equipment.
The decision to self-rescue was carefully considered and
was reasonable, given the nature of the injury, the fitness level
of the injured caver, the nature of the cave, and the location of
the accident. Tyler probably reached the surface much sooner
than he would have if he had stayed put and waited for rescue.
Notification and response time for cave rescue personnel,
along with the time it takes to get through the cave and reach
the accident site, typically result in several hours of delay
before an injured caver even begins to move toward the
surface.


********** 10 April
Oregon Caves, Oregon
illness, fainted in cave, heart problems
On the morning of April 10, Ranger Ann Schlichting at the
park Visitor Center received a call on the emergency phone
from a cave guide, reporting that a woman on a tour had
collapsed in the cave near one of the exits. Ranger Schlichting,
a First Responder, quickly headed into the cave accompanied
by other park personnel. They found a 65-year-old woman
with a history of heart problems who had collapsed on the
trail. She had regained consciousness prior to their arrival, but
was having difficulty breathing. A few minutes later, the
woman again lost consciousness. Schlichting administered
oxygen and called for paramedics. The woman was placed in a
stair-chair and carried out of the cave to the Visitors Center
and a waiting helicopter. She was then flown to a hospital for
treatment.
Tom Siewert, The Morning Report, National Park Service, 15
April 2004.


********** 18 April
Lost Fossil Cave, New Mexico
rockfall entrapment
At about 5:15 p.m. on the evening of April 18, two cavers,
Aaron Stockton and Jim Burke, were preparing to explore a
newly-discovered cave a few miles from the Dark Canyon
lookout tower. As Burke squeezed through the entrance, he
dislodged some rocks, starting a slide that ended when three
large rocks collapsed into the hole, trapping Burke inside.
Stockton dug and moved rocks until he had excavated a 6-
inch by 12-inch opening through which the cavers could
communicate. Burke was uninjured, but could not get out.
Stockton used tree branches to help stabilize other rocks
threatening to slide into the entrance, then hiked out to call for
help.
Burke was healthy, uninjured, and in no immediate danger,
SO for safety reasons cavers and members of a multi-agency
search and rescue team were called to help, but instructed not
to meet at the lookout tower until first light.
A hasty response team led by Stockton gathered supplies
and made a late-night, two-hour hike to the cave and flagged
the route. They arrived at the cave around midnight, and used
a long stick to push food, water, and a sleeping bag through
the small opening to Burke. He reported that he was getting
cold, but was otherwise in good condition. After that they
settled in to await the arrival of rescue crews in the morning.
Efforts to stabilize the entrance and remove obstacles
began early on the morning of the 19th. The rescuers quickly
determined that shoring would not be needed. This
determination, along with a forecast of wind gusts of up to 50
mph, resulted in the cancellation of a National Guard
Blackhawk helicopter that was on standby.
Members of the rescue team removed most of the smaller
rocks from the cave entrance by hand, and hauled out two
large boulders, each weighing more than 300 pounds. The
boulders were moved using bolt anchors, a come-along, and
the muscle power of the rescuers. At around noon, the last
obstacle was removed from the cave entrance and Burke was
able to exit the cave.
Burke, Stockton, and the rescue team made the two-hour
hike back to the Dark Canyon lookout tower without incident,
and the last of the search and rescue personnel left for home
around 4:30 p.m. Approximately 30 rescuers, mostly
volunteers, were involved in the effort.
1. Tom Bemis and Jay Melnick, Incident report, 17 May
2004.
2. Aaron Stockton, "Rescue Report: Lost Fossil Cave,"
Southwestern Cavers, v42n3, May-June 2004, p. 32.
Comments: This report demonstrates that it is not always
necessary or appropriate to call rescuers out into the
wilderness in the middle of the night for a cave rescue. The
situation was not life-threatening, and there was no need to put
people at risk by having them climb out of bed and drive on
unimproved roads to the scene in the wee hours.


********** 24 April
unspecified cave near Spokane, Washington
caver fall, lost control on rappel, broken ankle
Kim Allard (20) was descending the entrance pit of a cave
near the Wandermere Golf Course in North Spokane when she
lost control of her rappel and fell about 20 feet, breaking her
ankle. Allard was visiting the cave with a group of students
from Whitworth College when the accident occurred.
The cavers had rigged the narrow, 35-foot entrance pit and
two other members of the group, Charlie Shepherd (22) and
Rob Lange (20), had descended successfully before Allard's
fall. When Allard was unable to climb back out, one of the
group members on the surface went to a nearby house to call
for help.

---------- Page 17 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Rescuers soon arrived and a paramedic rappelled into the
pit to assist. All three cavers were hauled up the drop and
taken to a hospital for examination and treatment. Shepherd
and Lange were uninjured. Allard was treated and released.
1. "Woman Rescued From Cave," KXLY News Channel 4,
www.kxly.com, 26 April 2004.
2. Associated Press, "Climbers safe after one falls in deep
cave," Seattle Times, 27 April 2004.
Comments: There was no information about the equipment or
techniques used by the cavers in this incident. One report said
that "her gear failed, and she fell" while the other stated that
she "lost control of her climbing rope and fell." In small pits
such as this, novice rappellers can often be protected with a
quickly-applied bottom belay.


********** 2 May
Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico
caver fall, broken ribs
Kurt Anderson (62) was participating in a cave rescue
training exercise when he slipped and fell while climbing up a
steep slope. Anderson was climbing up out of the Bathtub
Room when a loose rock shifted under his foot. He stumbled
and fell backwards, tumbling about 12 feet before coming to
rest. He was conscious, but complained of pain in his chest
and had labored breathing. Another caver in the group, a
Registered Nurse, assessed his condition. Anderson had no
apparent injuries other than soreness in his chest area.
After some rest, Anderson felt that he was all right and
could continue the training exercise. He remained in the cave,
but was kept under observation and did not participate in any
lifting or carrying operations. After the trip, Anderson sought
medical attention and learned that he had fractured five ribs in
his fall.
Bob Rogers, Incident report, 10 June 2004.


********** 14 May
Bell Cavern, Colorado
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
Paul Schmidt (48), Timmie Schramm (39), Daniel
Warfield (34), Emilio Murphy (18), and Emilio's mother
Anne Murphy entered Bell Cavern around 11:00 a.m. on
Friday morning, planning to spend a couple of hours
exploring. Shortly after entering, Anne Murphy decided to
leave the cave and wait on the surface while the others
continued. She left without incident.
The other explorers did not fare SO well. As they made
their way through the cave, they became confused by the
many side passages and could not find the way out. When they
had not returned by 6:00 p.m., Anne Murphy became
concerned and called authorities.
Rescuers soon arrived and began a search of the cave. The
missing explorers were located at about 8:30 p.m., and were
found to be disoriented but unharmed. Everyone was back on
the surface by 9:00 p.m. The cavers were lost for eight hours.
La Plata County Sheriff's spokesman Lt. Dan Bender
observed that inexperienced spelunkers should be wary of
caves and offered some tips for safe caving, such as carrying
three sources of light, including a headlamp, wearing
appropriate clothing, including a hard hat, never caving alone,
and letting someone know your destination and expected time
of return. "Caving can be rewarding," according to Bender,
"But if you become lost or injured, we can't send a helicopter
to get you out."
1. Richard Rhinehart, "Explorers Rescued From Colorado's
Bell Cavern," Rocky Mountain Caving, v21n2, Spring
2004, pp. 4-5.
2. Dale Rodebaugh, "Rescuers save four explorers from
abandoned mine," The Durango Herald, 16 May 2004.
3. Dale Rodebaugh, "Sheriff's Office: Inexperienced
spelunkers should be wary of caves," The Durango Herald,
16 May 2004.
4. Associated Press, "Four Cavers Rescued From Durango
Mine," TheDenverChannel.com, May 2004.
Comments: The cavers were reported to be inexperienced and
poorly equipped. Anticipating a two-hour trip, they carried no
food and only a single bottle of water.
According to Rhinehart, the cave is located in an
abandoned quarry, and is a natural cavern in limestone. Media
reports referred to both the quarry and the cave as Weaver
Mine. The news stories also mentioned that there have been
reports of "bad air" in the cave's lower-level passages.
Rhinehart also notes that the cave was the scene of a more
serious rescue on June 19, 1986, when a 17-year-old boy
became stuck in a crevice. The boy was ultimately freed after
a lengthy rescue operation in which one rescuer was seriously
injured in a fall in the cave.


********** 27 May
Catacombs Cave, California
lost
Kyra Young (11) and Timothy "Ky" Ellinwood (11) were
exploring caves in Lava Beds National Monument with a
group of classmates and adult leaders on a field trip. The
cavers were equipped with helmets, flashlights, and warm
clothing, and had explored several smaller caves in the
Monument without incident earlier in the day before arriving
at the entrance to Catacombs Cave around 3:00 p.m. The
group entered, not realizing that Catacombs is quite different
from the caves they had explored earlier. Catacombs Cave is a
braided lava tube, more than a mile long, with multiple levels,
junctions, and connecting passages. It is one of the longest and
most complex caves in the park.
The cavers traveled about 600 feet through easy, mostly
walking passages before arriving at a mazy area with passages
leading in all directions. It was about 4:00 p.m., and Young's
mother, who was leading the group, announced that it was
time to leave.
The group started out, but Young and Ellinwood had
spotted a metal ladder in one of the side passages and wanted
to see what was at the top. Without telling the others, they
climbed up the ladder to the Boxing Glove Room and spent a
few minutes looking around before climbing back down to the
main passage. The other members of the group had not noticed
their absence and were, by that time, too far away to be seen
or heard. Young and Ellinwood hurried off down what they

---------- Page 18 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
thought was the passage out, expecting to catch up with the
group. Unfortunately, they chose the wrong passage and went
deeper into the mile-long cave.
When the rest of the group reached the cave entrance,
Young's mother realized that Young and Ellinwood were
missing. She waited a few minutes, thinking they would
emerge. When they did not, she went back into the cave,
calling their names. There was no sign of the missing pair. She
returned to the surface to check on the other children, then
made a second quick trip into the cave. There was still no sign
of the missing cavers. Young's mother then called the Visitor
Center on her cell phone to report the situation. She was told
not to worry - that this was quite common and that there was
only one way out of the cave. The staff person advised her to
wait at the entrance and to notify the park rangers if the
missing kids did not come out by 10:00 p.m.
Young's mother was not satisfied with that, and called
Gary Griffith, the teacher in charge of the trip. Griffith was
with another group in a different part of the park, but was an
experienced outdoorsman and had a map of the cave.
Accompanied by three other adult leaders, Griffith entered the
cave and searched for about three hours. When this search
failed to locate Young and Ellinwood, Griffith altered park
rangers and asked for their assistance.
Park Ranger Terry Harris notified the Siskiyou County
Sheriff's Office and requested their Search and Rescue Team.
The team has a good relationship with local cavers, and leader
Dave Nicholson called in local cavers who had trained with
the team for just such an emergency. Liz Wolff of the Shasta
Area Grotto served as a contact person, calling grotto
members and cavers around the region before heading to the
cave to join the search.
Cavers and other searchers gathered at the park Visitor
Center throughout the night and early morning. Using maps of
the cave, rescuers formulated search strategies and directed
search parties into the cave. By mid-morning on Friday they
had still not located Young and Ellinwood, and everyone was
becoming very concerned. Reporters had also arrived and the
incident was covered in television and radio news broadcasts
around the region.
Yreka caver Bill "Bighorn" Broeckel heard about the
incident on his car radio at lunchtime on Friday. He had been
to Catacombs Cave more than 60 times, and knew the cave
well. His initial thought was that the kids would soon be
found. Broeckel, a physician, was on call that day and had a
full schedule of patients to see in the afternoon. A short time
later, however, his wife, Judy, arrived to tell him that Wolff
had called and asked for their help. Broeckel sat down and
thought for a moment - the kids had now been in the cave for
almost 24 hours. They were probably cold, without light, and
possibly even injured. He knew the cave well. Probably, he
thought, they were in that room at the end of the cave. He
decided to go and see.
Judy and Bill Broeckel drove down to Lava Beds, arriving
at the Visitor Center around 5:00 p.m. Talking with the search
directors, Broeckel pointed out the location of the terminal
room on the cave map, and suggested that Young and
Ellinwood might be there. He was met with skepticism - most
of the rescuers did not believe the kids could have gone all the
way to the end of the cave. Broeckel had a feeling that they
could have, and was determined to go and look. Outside, he
met cavers Jim Wolff and Russ Yoder and accompanied them
to the cave. Once inside, they soon met other cavers engaged
in the search. Broeckel and Yoder headed for the terminal
room.
As they approached the end of the cave, Broeckel and
Yoder came to a low crawl. Halfway through the passage they
found shreds of black cloth matching the description of
Ellinwood's sweatshirt. Encouraged by this discovery, they
crawled forward and were soon rewarded when they heard
voices ahead. Arriving at the terminal room, they found
Young and Ellinwood cold and hungry, but otherwise in good
condition.
After becoming separated, the kids had spent several hours
wandering through the maze of passages searching for the way
out. Lacking a map or compass, they did not realize that they
were moving deeper and deeper into the cave. Eventually, they
wound up in the terminal room where they decided to stay put
and wait for rescue. During the day, searchers had examined
nearby passages, but the sound-deadening nature of the cave
prevented them from contacting the pair.
Broeckel and Yoder gave the kids some food and water
and led them back through the crawl and toward the entrance.
They met up with other searchers along the way and made a
short stop for more food and water before reaching the surface
just before sunset. Young and Ellinwood were in the cave for
27 hours.
1. Bill Broeckel, "Catacombs Rescue," SAG Rag, Shasta
Area Grotto, v23n5, July-August 2004, pp. 5-12.
2. Terry Harris, "Children Found Following Major SAR,"
The Morning Report, National Park Service, 2 June 2004.
3. Associated Press, "Two missing children rescued in lava
cave," San Diego Union-Tribune, 29 May 2004.
4. Christina Jewett and Art Campos, "Doctor's hunch pays
off in rescue of kids," Sacramento Bee, 29 May 2004.
5. Pamela Martineau, "Rescued kids home safe; town
rejoices," Sacramento Bee, 30 May 2004.
Comments: Adults leading caving trips for children must
always be alert to the possibility that some of their young
explorers may stray from the group, lured by curiosity and
adventure. Encourage young cavers to stay together, and, if
separated from the group, to stay put. It is a good idea to carry
a map of the cave, if one is available, and to review it with all
participants. A compass is also helpful. Youth group leaders
are also advised to recruit some experienced cavers to
accompany them underground.
This incident also underscores the need for searchers to
check every lead and crawl, especially when searching for
children. The young cavers had passed easily through the
crawl and other low passages in the cave that presented
obstacles to the adults searching for them. The searchers
underestimated the kids' ability and determination.


********** 17 June
Smiths Crack, Idaho
stuck
Steve Alborn and some friends from a church group were
exploring Smiths Crack when Alborn, who was reported to be
6 feet, 2 inches tall and to weigh 250 pounds, discovered that

---------- Page 19 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
he could not get out. On the way into the cave he had slid
down through a narrow slot to reach a lower passage. On the
way out, with gravity working against him rather than
assisting, Alborn could not squeeze back through. When his
companions were unable to free him, they called for help,
reaching the Elmore County Sheriff's office at about 8:00 p.m.
Search and rescue crews went to the cave and made
several attempts to get Alborn out. Their efforts were
ineffective until someone suggested using vegetable
shortening to "grease him up." Rescuers took a set of coveralls
and coated it liberally with Crisco, then sent them into the
cave for Alborn to wear.
Donning the "slick suit," Alborn stood on a friend's
shoulders and forced his body up into the crack while others
grabbed his arms and pulled from above. Thanks to the
lubricating action of the shortening, he finally slid through the
constriction. He was able to leave the cave without further
assistance, exiting at daybreak. He had been trapped for about
ten hours. Alborn said that he might consider going caving
again someday, "if I knew that the holes were big enough."
Brian Holmes, "Crisco helps man slip out of cave," Idaho's
NewsChannel 7, www.ktvb.com, 17 June 2004.


********** 25 June
Peppersauce Cave, Arizona
lost
Dan Garrison (38) and his son Justin (11) entered
Peppersauce Cave on July 25 with few supplies and no spare
batteries for their flashlights. After reaching the Book Room,
they realized that they could not find the route back to the
entrance. Unfortunately, Garrison had not told his wife or
anyone else where they were going, SO no one was likely to
come looking for them anytime soon.
They spent some time searching without success, then
decided to systematically map the passages as they explored in
the hope that this would lead them to the correct route. Using
the compass on Dan's wristwatch and a notebook and pen
found in the Book Room, they began sketching the various
passages as they continued their search.
After spending the night in the cave, the two cavers were
saved when Justin went searching for water and came upon a
rope that they had used on the previous day to get down to the
lower level of the cave. Justin quickly fetched his father, and
the pair made their way out of the cave. They were lost for
about 24 hours.
1. Rick Rhinehart, "Briefly," Rocky Mountain Caving,
v21n3, Summer 2004, p. 7.
2. "Conquering a Cave," The Arizona Republic, 7 August
2004.


********** 5 July
Ape Cave, Washington
caver fall
Eric Ball (20) went to explore Ape Cave on Mt. St. Helens
with his girlfriend, Jenny Lee, and companions Jason
Baidenmann, Kyle Christensen, and Aaron Asmann. Ball, who
was born with an impairment that blurs and distorts his vision,
is legally blind, but is nonetheless an outdoor adventure
enthusiast, participating in bungee jumping, hiking, downhill
skiing, and caving.
At about 1:00 p.m., Ball was exploring with his
companions in an area about 3/4 of a mile from the entrance
when he found a knotted rope hanging down from an upper
level passage. Ball climbed up the rope about 20 feet to a
ledge, and then attempted to jump across a crack to continue.
He landed in a steeply sloping area and lost his footing,
tumbling back to the floor below and landing on his left side
in a sandy-floored section of the lower passage.
Ball was around a corner and out of sight of the rest of the
group, but they heard his fall and came to investigate. Ball was
sitting up, but was in a lot of pain and could not stand. He had
broken several ribs, one of which punctured his lung, and
fractured his pelvis in four places. His friends made him lie
down, covered him with their sweatshirts and jackets to keep
him warm, and kept him still. They realized that they needed
help, SO Lee and Asmann stayed with Ball while Baidenmann
and Christensen left the cave to notify the authorities.
Rescuers from the Skamania County Sheriff's office and
the U.S. Forest Service were called to the cave. They placed
Ball in a litter and carried him out. The evacuation took about
two hours. He was taken by helicopter to a hospital where he
was reported to be recovering from his injuries.
1. Holly Danks, "Beaverton man who fell in cave
recovering, Portland Oregonian, 6 July 2004.
2. "Beaverton man in hospital after falling in Ape Cave,"
KATU.com, 6 July 2004.
Comments: It appears from the news accounts that the cavers
did not have much caving experience. Jumping in caves is
usually not a good idea, especially when you know there is a
20-foot drop below. If you are determined to jump, at least be
certain that you have a safe landing area. It may be that Ball
could not see the landing area clearly. Even with perfect
vision, jumping over an abyss in a dark cave is ill-advised.
Climbing a knotted rope of unknown origin is also not
generally advisable. Ball's companions did a good job of
taking care of him after the accident.


********** 28 July
Long Cold Cave, Nevada
rockfall entrapment
While rigging and surveying about 200 feet below the
entrance in Long Cold Cave in Great Basin National Park,
Rob Pleszewski (31) noticed the sound of rocks moving
beneath a large boulder. Pleszewski expressed concern about
the instability of the floor to the other members of the party,
Matt Reece (30) and Jason Mateljak (28). All three cavers had
walked across the boulder, which spanned the narrow passage,
on the way into the cave. Pleszewski then began the climb to
the surface, while the others continued to rig and descend two
more drops.
After taking some photographs, Mateljak and Reece
headed out. Mateljak reminded Reece of Pleszewski's
discomfort with the large boulder, and they approached it
warily. As Reece stepped on the boulder, it shifted to the left,
pinning his foot against the wall.

---------- Page 20 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Pleszewski was almost out of the cave when Reece became
trapped. His companions called him using a radio and asked
him to contact park dispatch and inform them of the incident.
Mateljak and Reece worked diligently to try and move the
boulder. Eventually they were able to shift the boulder, freeing
Reece's foot. The foot-loop of his climbing system was still
pinned beneath the boulder, however, and could not be
retrieved. Mateljak gave his foot-loop to Reece, who began to
climb out of the cave, and then tied a foot-loop from webbing
for himself.
After the climb out, Pleszewski and Mateljak helped Reece
hobble back to their truck and drove him to the hospital in Ely.
Reece suffered severe bruising and sprained tendons in his left
foot.
Matt Reece, Incident report, 11 August 2004.
Comments: Reece notes that the cavers were using Family
Radio Service radios for communication at the vertical drops.
These came in very handy during the incident, as Pleszewski,
at the entrance of the cave, could hear nothing but
unintelligible screams at first. Mateljak was able to convey the
situation to Pleszewski, and get him headed to the truck for the
park radio in case extra assistance would be required. Reece
also observes that he is still not sure how they managed to
move the boulder.


********** 18 August
Devils Den Cave, Arkansas
stuck
Tim Smafield (15) was exploring Devils Den Cave with
his twin brother Tom when he slid into a 20-foot long, 15-foot
high, 12-inch-wide fissure called the Right Hand Crevice.
When his foot became stuck in the bottom of the crack,
Smafield's brother Tom ran to the Visitor Center to get help,
arriving at about 5:30 p.m.
Park rangers Jeremy Bruce and Tim Scott gathered their
equipment and followed Tom Smafield to the crevice. Scott
also called park superintendent Jesse Cox to inform him of the
incident. When they arrived at the crevice, the rangers found
that Smafield was SO deep into the narrow passage that they
could not reach him.
Bruce and Scott had brought some rope and webbing along
with their equipment. They tossed one end of a piece of
tubular webbing to Smafield and tried to pull him out, but
were unsuccessful. Realizing that the situation could become
serious, they called Cox to tell him that they needed additional
help, and asked him to call for cave rescue teams.
By 7:50 p.m., several cave rescuers and additional park
rangers had gathered at the scene. The group decided that the
best way to free Smafield would be to pull him up and out the
top of the crevice rather than to the side. They fashioned a
loop from the webbing, and Bruce climbed onto a ledge above
Smafield and dropped the loop down to him. With some
coaching, Smafield was able to get the loop around his chest
and under his arms. Scott crawled underneath Bruce and as
close to Smafield as he could get. Bruce then used the
webbing to pull Smafield up about five feet, until he could
reach the top of the crevice and Scott could help him climb
out. He was freed at about 8:20 p.m.
Smafield was given food and water and a blanket. He was
tired but able to walk, SO he was escorted back to the Visitor
Center. He had no injuries and was released to his mother.
Smafield was stuck for about three hours.
1. Jeremy Bruce, Incident report, 19 August 2004.
2. David Comstock, Incident report, 20 August 2004.
3. "Boy Rescued From Devil's Den Cave,"
TheHometownChannel.com, 19 August 2004.


********** 20 August
Nutty Putty Cave, Utah
stuck
Brock Clark (16) was exploring Nutty Putty Cave with a
group of six friends on a Friday afternoon. At about 4:00 p.m.
he climbed head-first down into a small passage. As he did so,
he lost his grip and slid forward. It was a dead end, and Clark
tried to turn around to get back out, but the passage was too
tight. When he tried to bend and turn he became wedged.
Clark's friends tried to help, but could not move him. One
stayed with Clark while the others left the cave to call for aid.
They reached the Utah County Sheriff's Office at 6:00 p.m.,
and search and rescue team members were dispatched to the
cave. When they arrived, the rescuers found Clark lying on his
side, head-down, with his right leg sticking out and his left leg
folded uncomfortably behind him. His contorted position had
become painful.
For the next eight hours, the rescuers worked to free the
boy from the passage. They could not reach his head, and
could not get any food or water to him. Over time, Clark lost
feeling in his left leg and eventually his entire left side. The
work was tiring for the rescuers, as well as for Clark, who
became exhausted in the struggle.
Eventually, the rescuers focused on straightening Clark's
left leg. They were finally able to accomplish this around
midnight. After placing a harness around him they were able
to pull him back up out of the narrow passage.
Clark was exhausted and had no feeling in his left side.
The rescuers gave him food and water and allowed him to rest
and recover some strength for the trip out. He could not stand
or walk, and it took two more hours for rescuers to pull and
drag him through the tight passages and climbs to reach the
surface. Clark was then taken to a hospital where he spent
several days recovering from the ordeal.
1. Utah County Sheriff's Office, Incident report, 21 August
2004.
2. "Teen Rescued From Cave," KSL-TV, tv.ksl.com, 21
August 2004.
3. Caleb Warnock, "Orem teen rescued in Nutty Putty
Cave," Provo Daily Herald, 22 August 2004.
4. Richard Rhinehart, "Briefly," Rocky Mountain Caving,
v21n3, Summer 2004, p. 8.


********** 4 September
Nutty Putty Cave, Utah
stuck
David Crowther (23) and two companions entered Nutty
Putty Cave at about 10:30 p.m. on Friday night. They spent

---------- Page 21 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
about two hours exploring, then started toward the entrance.
They came to a narrow fissure, and two of the men squeezed
through. Crowther entered with his arms extended in front,
thinking that he would fit better. He made it partway through,
but with both of his arms extended he could not push himself
forward. One of his companions grabbed his hands and pulled,
and Crowther became wedged like a cork in a bottle.
Crowther's friends tried in vain to get him out of the
squeeze. Other people exploring the cave joined in the effort,
pushing and pulling, but he could not be moved. Shortly after
1:00 a.m., one of his companions went to the surface and used
a cell phone to call for help.
Members of the Utah County Sheriff's Office Search and
Rescue Team went to the cave, along with members of Utah
Cave Rescue. Rescuers were able to move Crowther forward
about one foot, but no further. They brought in a portable air
chisel and used it to chip away at the walls of the passage and
enlarge the opening. After about three hours of work they
were able to pull Crowther from the squeeze. He was
uninjured, and left the cave without further assistance.
1. Utah County Sheriff's Office, Incident report, 5 September
2004.
2. Shay Lelegren, Incident report, 5 September 2004
3. "Rescue Teams Save Man From Nutty Putty Caves," KSL-
TV, tv.ksl.com, 4 September 2004.
Comments: The two rescues in close proximity received
substantial media coverage, resulting in calls for the cave to be
sealed. It was later gated, and access is now managed by a
local grotto.


********** 9 October
Narrows Cave, Colorado
rockfall entrapment
At about 8:30 p.m. on Saturday evening, Ryan Gosciejew,
Franz Hankins (35), and novice caver Jocey Goodloe were
making a "loop trip" through Narrows Cave when they came
to a crawlway at the top of Spring Canyon. Gosciejew went
through first, followed by Hankins. As he moved through the
crawl, Hankins pulled on a rock in the side of the passage,
triggering the collapse of a boulder that pinned his head and
arm. Dirt and small debris rained down, filling the area around
his head. His companions were unable to free him, SO Goodloe
stayed with Hankins while Gosciejew left to get help.
Gosciejew reached the surface in about 30 minutes and
called Mike Frazier, describing the situation and asking for
help. Frazier grabbed his caving gear, some rescue equipment,
and a hydraulic jack, and headed for the cave. As he drove, he
called Dan Sullivan and asked him to call in other area cavers.
Frazier met Gosciejew at the parking area, and the two
men returned to the cave. Frazier went to Spring Canyon and
climbed up to reach Hankins' head, while Gosciejew went
around to join Goodloe at his feet. Hankins was still pinned,
and his head was partially buried in dirt and debris. He was
responsive, but was having difficulty getting enough air.
Frazier began digging away the dirt with his hands, trying
to get to Hankins' head. As he pulled the dirt and debris from
the passage, he dragged it back through the crawl into the
room about 15 feet beyond. After four or five trips he had dug
down about 12 inches, exposing Hankins's left hand. He kept
digging, eventually exposing Hankins' helmet, which was
pinned against the wall by a large slab of rock. The sides of
the helmet were buckling slightly inward under the pressure.
Frazier kept digging, and finally managed to reach in and
unbuckle the helmet's chin strap. Hankins' head was still
pinned, but he was able to breathe more easily.
While Frazier attempted to lift and support the slab,
Gosciejew grabbed Hankins' feet and pulled. Hankins
screamed as he was dragged backward, and his head popped
free while the helmet remained wedged under the rock.
The cavers then focused their attention on Hankins' arm,
which was still pinned. Using the same approach, they tried
twice without success to pull Hankins from the crawl. The
passage ceiling was still unstable, and they decided that they
could use a jack to lift and support the slab, but that they
needed something to prevent further collapse. Gosciejew went
out to get shoring material and help while Frazier continued to
dig out the loose material from around Hankins' arm.
By 11:00 p.m. more cavers had arrived to help. Steven
Kumpf, Daniel Laos, and several other cavers brought in jacks
and some two-by-fours for shoring. The cavers used these to
brace the slab at both ends and placed the jack underneath the
rock. Frazier carefully extended the jack, and once the rock
was lifted, the cavers were able to drag Hankins out by his
feet. His helmet was still jammed in the crawl, and Frazier
kicked if free. When he did so, the passage collapsed again,
burying the jack.
Freed from entrapment, Hankins began to go into shock.
The cavers treated him appropriately, and after a few minutes
he began to recover. His arm was numb, swollen, and
discolored, but after about 15 minutes the color improved and
he started to regain some feeling and movement in his hand.
The cavers secured Hankins' arm with a sling and prepared to
help him out of the cave.
They started for the entrance just after midnight, belaying
and spotting Hankins down the breakdown climbs in Spring
Canyon. Soon they arrived at a series of long crawls. They
were forced to remove the sling from Hankins' arm SO that he
could move himself through the crawls. Eventually, they met a
group of rescuers who had brought in a Sked litter. By this
time, Hankins was very tired, SO the rescuers packaged him in
the litter and then carried and dragged him through the
remaining crawls.
Once they reached walking passage, Hankins was removed
from the litter. He was lowered down a climb at Inquisition
Dome and was then able to walk to the entrance. He reached
the surface around 2:00 a.m. His wife was waiting outside, and
drove him to an emergency room.
1. Dan Sullivan, Incident report, 11 October 2004.
2. Mike Frazier, "A Narrow Escape," Rocky Mountain
Caving, v21n4, Autumn 2004, pp. 7-8.
3. Steven Kumpf, "Rescuing Franz Hankins From Narrows
Cave," Rocky Mountain Caving, v21n4, Autumn 2004, pp.
8-9.
4. John Ensslin, "Spelunker rescued by other cavers," Rocky
Mountain News, 11 October 2004.
Comments: Hankins' helmet undoubtedly saved his life. A
good caving helmet is worth every dollar of its cost. How
much is your head worth?

---------- Page 22 ----------
2004 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 9 October
Waterworks Cave, Tennessee
dislocated shoulder in cave
Woody Vinzant (41) and four other cavers were exploring
Waterworks Cave when Vinzant climbed down into a fissure
to look at some formations. At the bottom, he was supporting
himself with his hands on the walls when he squatted down to
take a quick peek into a low area. When he did so, his
shoulder became dislocated.
Vinzant's companions immobilized his arm by placing a
rolled-up knee-pad in his armpit and securing the arm with
some webbing. Vinzant's arm was sticking out at an odd angle
and was very painful, but he was able to walk, SO the group
started out of the cave. His companions helped him up through
several squeezes and belayed him up three climbs to reach the
bottom of the 60-foot entrance pit. They helped him get on
rope, and Vinzant then climbed out on his own. He reached
the surface about two hours after the accident and was driven
to a hospital where doctors were able to set his shoulder.
Woody Vinzant, Incident report, 21 October 2004.
Comments: Vinzant notes that his shoulder had been
dislocated once before. Repeat dislocations are not
uncommon.
Common Caving Mistakes and Consequences
1. Primary light failed; didn't carry backup lights, or backup lights inadequate - stranded.
2. No map, no guide, and poor route-finding skills - lost.
3. Wore inadequate or inappropriate clothing for conditions - hypothermia.
4. Didn't bring extra clothing - hypothermia.
5. Moving but not paying attention - caver fall.
6. Free-climbing more than a body-length without belay - caver fall.
7. Traversing above drop without belay or safety line - caver fall.
8. Ignored rainy weather forecast; entered water cave - flood entrapment or drowning.
9. Careless movement in tight passage or crevice - stuck.
10. Entered bat cave or passage without precautions - histoplasmosis.
11. Solo caving and something went wrong - stranded.
12. Didn't tell anyone of plans - delayed rescue by hours or days.
13. Didn't clear loose rocks from lip - struck by falling rock.
14. Climbing or descending rope hand-over-hand - lost grip and fell.
15. Climbing cable ladder without belay - fell off.
16. Lost control of rappel; no bottom belay or rappel safety - fell to the bottom.
17. Out of shape or unfamiliar with climbing system - stranded on rope.
18. Didn't know how to change from rappel to climb or from climb to rappel - stranded on rope.
19. Hair or clothing stuck in rappel device; didn't know how to recover - stranded on rope.
20. Rappelling without wearing climbing system - stranded in pit or on rope.
21. Attempted pull-down trip without map or guide - stranded.
22. Sharing vertical gear; lost equipment passing it up or down the pit - stranded.
23. Didn't tie a knot in the end of the rope - rappelled off the end and fell.
24. Moving around lip of pit without being belayed or being on rope - fell into pit.
25. Didn't check attachment of rappel device to harness - became detached from rappel device and fell.


********** 1 December
Devils Punchbowl, Guam
fell into pit entrance
Two men were driving around on a Wednesday evening
and decided to explore Devils Punchbowl, a 50-foot deep pit
located in a land trust preserve near the Hilton Resort. At
about 11:00 p.m., the men entered the preserve through an
unlocked gate and walked to the cave. They had no lights or
caving equipment. One of the men attempted to climb down
into the pit, but lost his footing and fell to the bottom. His
companion ran for help and flagged down a passing security
guard, who called police.
Rescuers were dispatched to the scene, where they found
that the man had died from his fall. His body was removed
from the pit. An official responsible for the property said that
while the property is well-known, it is not open to the public,
and that the gate was supposed to be kept locked.
Theresa Merto, "Man killed in pit fall," Pacific Daily News,
www.guampdn.com, 3 December 2004.

---------- Page 23 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 15 January
Surprise Cave, New York
caver fall
Matthew Johnson (25), Tom Oakes, David Oakes, and
Hannah Schoch entered Surprise Cave around 1:30 p.m. on a
January afternoon. The cave is gated and is closed from
September to April to protect hibernating bats. The cavers
were aware of the closure and chose to enter the cave anyway.
They crawled through the ice-trimmed entrance and made
their way through the cave to the Mystery Dome, where they
rigged a rope to rappel to the bottom. At about 3:30 p.m.,
Johnson crawled up to the lip of the pit to get on rope. As
Johnson attempted to rig his rappel device, he lost his footing
and fell about 20 feet to the bottom. He suffered multiple
injuries to his feet and legs, including fractures, sprains, and
torn ligaments.
Johnson was conscious and able to move, but was in a lot
of pain and could not walk. The cavers decided that they
needed help to get him out, SO David Oakes remained with
Johnson while the others left the cave and went to the nearest
house, where Tom Oakes called fellow caver Mike Warner at
about 6:30 p.m. After describing the situation, Oakes went
back into the cave carrying supplies, while Warner alerted
authorities and began a call-out of cavers around the region.
Local law enforcement and emergency response personnel
arrived fairly quickly, but had limited caving experience,
equipment, or rescue training. It was Saturday evening, and
several hours passed while the experienced cavers who could
be contacted gathered their equipment and drove to the site.
While waiting for hours at the bottom of the pit, Johnson
had gotten cold. When Tom Oakes returned, he was able to
help Johnson get back up the pit and start moving toward the
entrance. The first rescuers, Mark Folsom and Dan Werner,
entered the cave shortly before 10:00 p.m. As they approached
Mystery Dome, they met Johnson, who was crawling slowly
with help from Oakes. Folsom and Werner gave Johnson some
water and warmed him with heat packs while Oakes continued
out of the cave.
More cavers arrived around midnight and were able to help
Johnson through the passages to the bottom of the 23-foot pit
in the Entrance Room. Rescuers hauled Johnson up the pit and
helped him through the entrance crawl. He reached the surface
at 3:11 a.m. Johnson was ferried down the hill by snowmobile
to a waiting ambulance, and then taken to a hospital for
treatment.
1. Joe Levinson, "Surprise Cave Rescue - Jan. 15, 2005,
Speleothemes, Northern New Jersey Grotto, February
2005.
2. Mark Folsom, "Surprise Cave Rescue," The Northeastern
Caver, March 2005.
3. Carl Heitmeyer, "Surprise/Mystery Cave Rescue, January
15, 2005," Central Jersey Caver, February 2005.
4.
Jessica Gardner and Ramsey Al-Rikabi, "Caver gets nasty
surprise," Times Herald-Record, www.recordonline.com,
17 January 2005.
5. Associated Press, "Conn. Man Rescued From N.Y. Cave
Where He Suffered Injuries," www.wnbc.com, 17 January
2005.
Comments: The area at the lip of the drop in Mystery Dome is
reported to be a muddy crawl. Johnson slipped and fell into
the pit while attaching his rappel rack. Accidents like this can
usually be prevented by clipping in to the rope or anchor
before approaching the lip. Use a lanyard or cow's tail and
carabiner to clip in to the anchor rigging, or attach an ascender
to the rope. Do not remove your safety attachment until you
have rigged your rappel device and tested its operation.


********** 19 February
Breathing Cave, Virginia
caver fall
Eric Berge (43) and Janet Tinkham (41) entered Breathing
Cave leading a group including college students Yvette
Camperud (20), Brian Stafford, (18), Aliela Ryan (18), plus
Eric's son Earle Berge (11). Tinkham and Eric Berge were
very experienced cavers and Earle Berge had been to the cave
on several previous trips, but the three students were new to
caving.
The cavers made their way through the cave, descending
several climb-downs, squeezing through the Nutcracker,
negotiating mud slopes and breakdown, wading through the
Grand Canyon, and descending along the Serpentine Way to
reach the waterfall. There, they took a snack break and spoke
with some other cavers who were surveying nearby, then
started out.
The Serpentine Way is a narrow, winding passage that has
a slight upgrade to it. Water flows along this passage in spots,
and the level fluctuates. On this day the water wasn't very
high, but the damp passage made for slippery footing. As they
climbed up the passage, Tinkham was in the lead with
Camperud behind her. As she stepped up onto a foothold,
Camperud's foot slipped and she fell back against a protruding
formation that impacted her back just below her shoulder
blade, bruising and breaking several ribs.
The injury was painful, but Camperud could move her arm
and climb, SO the cavers headed for the entrance. They made it
out of the Serpentine Way and through the Grand Canyon, but
by the time they reached the Cathedral Passage, Camperud
was having difficulty. Stafford had an Ace bandage, which
they used to wrap Camperud's chest, giving her some relief.
Berge had a 50-foot piece of webbing, which they used to
lower Camperud down some of the mud slopes. At several
points she felt nauseous from the pain, but kept going.
At the Nutcracker they took a rest. Berge knew that it
would be difficult to get Camperud through the tight passage
and up the two climbs beyond. Camperud struggled through
the squeeze, becoming stuck briefly before the others could
get her through. The ordeal left her feeling faint and nauseous
from the pain and exertion. Berge and Tinkham realized that
they needed help to get Camperud up the two climbs and
through the remaining passages to the entrance.

---------- Page 24 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
The cavers moved to a more comfortable area at the
bottom of the first climb, where they would be out of the
breeze and away from dripping water. Tinkham knew the way
out and headed for the surface to call for rescue. Berge went
back through the cave to find the surveyors and enlist their
aid, while the other cavers stayed with Camperud, wrapping
her in extra clothing and huddling together to keep her warm.
Berge soon located one of the surveyors, Bob Hoke, and
told him what had happened. Hoke gave Berge some extra
clothing for Camperud, and rounded up the rest of his crew
while Berge returned to the Nutcracker.
Camperud felt a little better after the rest. Tinkham had
returned with a blanket and the news that rescuers were on the
way. The surveyors soon arrived, and the assembled cavers
decided that together they could get Camperud up the climbs.
In preparation, they immobilized her right arm with a sling
and tied a seat harness on her.
With a belay from above and help from below, Camperud
was pulled and boosted up the two climbs. She continued
through the cave with assistance, eventually crawling out into
the main passage where members of the local rescue squad
were waiting. They strapped her into a litter and carried her
out the entrance and down the hill to a waiting ambulance. She
was driven to a hospital where she was treated and released
the next day.
1. Rick Lambert, Incident report, 20 February 2005.
2. Janet Tinkham, Incident report, 15 February 2007.
3. Eric Berge, "Something to Tell Your Grandchildren,"
Front Royal Column, v10n3, September 2005, pp. 3-5.
4. Bob Hoke, "Breathing Cave Survey and Rescue, February
19, 2005," The Region Record, v18n2, Spring 2005, pp. 7-
8.
Comments: Tinkham, Berge, and Lambert all commented on
Camperud's determination and perseverance. She undoubtedly
got out much sooner than she would have if rescuers had been
forced to carry her the whole way. The cavers in both groups
were carrying extra clothing, food, batteries, and short lengths
of rope and webbing, which greatly facilitated the rescue.
Tinkham points out that it is easy to become complacent about
what you carry in your pack, and leave these things out.
Fortunately, these cavers were well prepared.


********** 19 February
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
caver fall
Ten cavers from the Charleston Grotto entered Sharps
Cave, a multi-level cave known for its big passages and
waterfalls. It has a tight, vertical entrance that opens into
extensive passages leading east and west. The group chose to
go west and, as they left the western end of Halloween Hall,
several hundred yards from the entrance, Tom Hailer stated
that he felt sick and could not continue. After some discussion,
Hailer decided to wait while the others explored.
The group continued to the J18 Junction, where they
climbed down to the stream, waded upstream, and looked at
the two waterfalls. The stream was in flood and the water was
cold, but the waterfalls were very impressive. The cavers
returned to J18, climbed back to the upper level, and
continued west to Blackfish Junction, a very high room with
breakdown and mud slopes leading down to two streams.
Several cavers chose not to follow the leader down to the
lower level, descending instead by an "easier" route. As Kim
Beech-Shaffer (42) descended the very last part, helped by her
husband, Brian Shaffer, both cavers slipped, fell about six feet,
and tumbled into the stream.
They appeared to be unhurt, SO the group continued
downstream for several hundred yards, where they left the
stream and climbed up to another section of the upper level.
However, when they had left the cold water and stopped to
eat, Kim complained of pain in her leg. She rolled up her pants
and discovered that her lower leg was badly bruised. Another
caver gave Kim some aspirin, and the cavers decided to abort
the trip and head out.
Returning to the stream level, George Dasher had trouble
with one spot and climbed back up to find a better route. Kim
was able to descend with help from Brian and George.
Another caver climbed down, and the first four cavers started
upstream. Amie Nottingham, the next person in line,
attempted to climb down where Dasher had turned around, but
fell about five feet and tumbled into the waist-deep water.
After catching her breath, she was able to continue. The group
again started upstream, now with two people limping and
others shivering. Kim was moving very slowly and could not
be rushed. Several cavers were very cold, and Hailer was still
waiting in Halloween Hall. The situation was complicated by
the fact that only Dasher knew the way out of the cave.
Dasher divided the party into two groups. Kim, Brian, and
another caver continued out at a slow pace while Dasher took
the rest and headed east to get Hailer. After traveling a few
hundred yards, Dasher sent one person back to show the
trailing group the way, then sent two more back from a point
near the J18 Junction.
At the J18 Junction, the cavers encountered another group
from the Front Royal Grotto, who immediately offered to help.
While they were discussing the situation, the trailing group
arrived at the Junction. Kim was still moving slowly but it was
apparent that she would be able to make it out, SO the Front
Royal cavers climbed down to look at the waterfalls and the
Charleston Grotto group continued toward the entrance.
Dasher and two others retrieved Hailer and rejoined the main
group, who then slowly made their way out of the cave. The
cavers belayed Kim at the entrance climb, and everyone exited
without further incident
George Dasher, Incident report, 28 March 2005.
Comments: What would have happened to the group if Dasher
had become injured and unable to lead the way out? One also
wonders about the decision to leave a sick caver alone in the
cave. Caving is generally regarded as a team activity.


********** 5 March
Devils Den Cave, Arkansas
stuck
Reports of the April 9, 2005, rescue at Devils Den Cave
mentioned that a similar incident had occurred about a month
earlier, on March 5. Park rangers were reported to have
rescued a man who became stuck in a tight passage in the

---------- Page 25 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
cave. The cave rescue team was called, but rangers were able
to free the man before their arrival. No other details were
available.
1. David Comstock, Incident report, 3 May 2005.
2. Kate Ward, "Man rescued from Devil's Den cave after
more than 5 hours," Northwest Arkansas Times, 10 April
2005.


********** 9 April
Devils Den Cave, Arkansas
stuck
Richard Harness (20) was accompanying a group of about
12 children in exploring the cave when he became stuck in a
tight passage. Harness was following the kids through the cave
at about 11:30 a.m. when he came to a tight vertical fissure
connecting two larger horizontal passages. He forced himself
into the crack and squeezed partway through before becoming
wedged and unable to retreat. When the group did not return
to the surface by the appointed time, Melissa Jones, an adult
member of the group who had remained outside, alerted park
personnel.
Rangers and local firefighters entered the cave and
attempted to enlarge the passage using a sledgehammer and
chisel. The effort was unsuccessful, yielding only a broken
hand for one of the rangers. About two hours into the rescue,
the Washington County Search and Rescue team arrived.
Members of the team had been trained in cave rescue
techniques, and suggested a different approach. They
determined that Harness could probably be freed by cutting
away his blue jeans and lifting him up higher in the fissure.
Using slings fashioned from tubular webbing, Harness was
lifted out of the crack about 10 minutes later. He had been
stuck for about five hours, but was able to leave the cave
under his own power.
1. David Comstock, Incident report, 3 May 2005.
2. Kate Ward, "Man rescued from Devil's Den cave after
more than 5 hours," Northwest Arkansas Times, 10 April
2005.
Comments: Comstock notes that emergency personnel who
are not trained or experienced in cave rescue often
underestimate the difficulty of crack and crevice rescue and
delay calling for additional help. Park officials should be
aware of cave rescue resources and have a pre-plan for
emergency response to ensure that trained cave rescuers are
called promptly. As several incidents in this issue
demonstrate, a caver trapped in a tight passage is in serious
danger from hypothermia, dehydration, exhaustion, and
compression syndrome - all potentially life-threatening
conditions.


********** 23 April
Copperhead Cave, Arkansas
caver fall
Angela Anders (27) was exploring Copperhead Cave with
several companions when she fell down a pit about 20 feet
inside the cave. Her companions went for help, and park
rangers from the Buffalo National River responded, along with
local rescuers and emergency services personnel.
Ranger Lee Brumbaugh rappelled into the pit and
determined that Anders had injured her back. She was placed
in a litter and hauled out of the pit, then transported by
helicopter to a hospital. Anders had suffered a fractured
vertebra in the fall. Heather Hinshel, another member of the
caving party, had also suffered a minor leg injury and was
taken by ground ambulance to an emergency room where she
was treated and released.
Bob Maguire, "Rescue from Copperhead Cave," The Morning
Report, National Park Service, 2 May 2005.
Comments: The cave is reported to be well-known locally, and
many poorly-equipped visitors apparently use a cedar log to
climb in and out of the pit. The cause of Anders' fall is
unknown, but it appears that the group did not have proper
vertical equipment.


********** 14 May
Raulston Pit, Tennessee
stranded on rope, suspension trauma
On Saturday, May 14, 2005, Van Cain (33), Ken
Thomas (42), and Boston Dulcie (29) left the SERA Cave
Carnival in Mentone, Alabama, to go to Raulston Pit, a 750-
foot-long pit-cave in Marion County, Tennessee. The cave
entrance is a 140-foot pit in a large stream gully, and the pit is
broken by a major ledge 60 feet off the floor. There is a single
bolt at the ledge that is sometimes used as a re-belay anchor.
The cavers rigged the pit with a 300-foot rope
anchored to a large tree. Cain rappelled first, stopping at the
ledge to anchor the rope to the re-belay bolt and waiting for
Dulcie and Thomas to descend. All three cavers then rappelled
the remaining 60 feet to the bottom, where they spent about 45
minutes exploring the cave.
When it was time to climb out, Cain ascended to the
ledge, where he got off rope and waited to help the others if
needed. At about 1:30 p.m., Dulcie started his ascent. Dulcie
was new to vertical caving and had recently purchased a
ropewalker system, which he had used only a few times before
the trip. His system included a quick-attach safety ascender
(QAS) on an adjustable-length lanyard. Unfortunately, he
neglected to attach his chest roller to the rope. He also began
his climb with the QAS lanyard in the fully-extended position.
Dulcie noticed right away that his system did not feel
right. He had to hang on to the handle of the safety ascender to
keep himself upright, and soon found himself struggling to
make progress. Dulcie was about 12 feet off the floor when his
arms tired and he lost his grip on the ascender. He dropped
into a supine position in his harness, hanging from the
extended lanyard and the safety strap attached to his knee
ascender.
Once Dulcie caught his breath, he realized that his
chest roller was not attached. Dulcie pulled himself back
upright and tried to attach it to the rope, but was unable to do
SO. Tension in the rope from his lower ascenders and
interference from the pinch protector on his chest roller
thwarted his efforts. He was becoming tired from the struggle
and getting wet from the spray of a small waterfall in the pit.

---------- Page 26 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Dulcie wanted to get back down, but did not know how to
change over to rappel. Cain called down suggestions from
above and Thomas offered direction from below, but Dulcie
could not resolve the problem.
Thomas then got on rope and climbed up to try to
help Dulcie by supporting him while he tried to attach the
roller. The extra weight on the rope only made the maneuver
more difficult, and the cavers soon abandoned the effort.
Thomas climbed back down and got off rope. Dulcie had
managed to reach his QAS and slide it down the rope enough
to keep it within reach, but the struggle to remain upright had
left him exhausted. He still could not figure out how to attach
the roller. When he let go of the QAS he found himself
hanging partially upside down, with his left leg jammed
underneath him and the QAS once more out of reach.
Thomas got back on rope, climbed past Dulcie, and
tried to help him climb back down by operating the QAS for
him. They had managed to descend about two feet when
Thomas accidentally disconnected the Croll chest ascender of
his frog system from the rope while down-climbing. When he
was unable to reattach it, the two cavers realized that they
were both stranded. They called up to Cain and told him to go
for help. About one hour had elapsed since Dulcie had started
his climb.
Cain climbed the rest of the way out, hiked down the
mountain, and called 911 at about 3:30 p.m. Kimball Fire and
Rescue and Marion County EMA responded, assessed the
situation, and called the Chattanooga Hamilton County Cave
and Cliff Team at about 4:30 p.m. to request their assistance.
Some team members were at SERA, and drove from there to
the cave while others responded from Chattanooga and
brought the rescue trucks and equipment. The first members of
the Hamilton County team reached the cave around 5:30 p.m.,
several hours after Dulcie and Thomas had become stranded.
Others, including the team doctor, arrived soon after.
One rescuer rappelled down to check on the stranded
cavers while the rest worked to set up a haul system at the pit
and another on the steep slope above the entrance. The two
cavers had been hanging in the spray of a small waterfall the
whole time and had become soaked and hypothermic. Dulcie
had not been able to move his left leg for hours. He was in a
lot of pain and had lost sensation in his lower legs. He was
also shivering uncontrollably, and suffering from nausea and
dizziness.
Because of the likelihood of suspension trauma, the
cavers were not immediately lowered to the bottom or taken
off rope. When a person has been hanging in a harness for a
long time, releasing the constriction and pressure of the
harness suddenly can cause serious illness, including cardiac
arrest. This can be prevented with appropriate procedures and
with medication, which the team had available.
Since Dulcie was in the more serious condition, he
was the first to be evacuated. The haul line was attached to his
seat harness, a rescuer removed his ascenders, and he was
lifted from the pit while the rescuer climbed beside him. As
soon as he reached the top, the medical team took over,
treating him for suspension trauma and hypothermia. He was
wrapped in blankets and placed in a litter, then hauled up the
steep slope above the pit. This process was then repeated for
Thomas.
The Marion County rescuers had cleared an ATV
trail from the parking and staging area down to the top of the
slope, and were able to ferry Dulcie and Thomas in turn up the
hill to a waiting ambulance. They were both taken to the
hospital. Thomas was released after examination, but Dulcie
remained in the hospital for several days undergoing treatment
for the effects of suspension trauma before being released.
Several weeks passed before his recovery was complete.
1. Boston Dulcie, Incident report, 14 September 2005.
2. Ken Thomas, Incident report, 30 May 2006.
3. Van Cain, Incident report, 17 May 2005.
4. Bill Putnam, Incident report, 16 May 2005.
5. Laura House, "Rescuers save men stranded in Marion
cave," Chattanooga Times Free Press, 17 May 2005.
Comments: Dulcie concedes that he was unfamiliar with his
climbing system, and should have practiced more before going
to the pit. He also notes that if he had learned and practiced
changing over from ascent to rappel, he could have gone back
down and gotten off rope to sort things out.
Dulcie also did not realize that his adjustable lanyard
needed to be shortened to place the QAS ascender within
reach. A prusik knot is incorporated into these lanyards for
just that purpose. It is standard practice to start out with the
lanyard shortened rather than extended, SO that the ascender is
in reach and the lanyard can be lengthened during a change-
over to transfer weight from the ascender to the rappel device.
If Dulcie had shortened the lanyard at the beginning of the
incident, he would have been able to sit comfortably in his
harness, with his hands free and no tension on the rope from
his lower ascenders to interfere as he attached the chest roller.
When he slid the ascender down the rope without shortening
the lanyard, he inadvertently made things worse. Cavers using
lanyards of this type should consider trimming the length to
ensure that the ascender remains within reach even when the
lanyard is fully extended. Practice also helps in fine-tuning
your equipment.
Thomas became stranded when he unintentionally
removed the Croll ascender of his frog system from the rope
while down-climbing. This happened because he was
releasing the cam by pulling down on the safety catch on the
bottom of the cam. He writes that he was taking a step
downward when he was startled by Cain yelling down from
above and pulled too hard on the safety catch, opening the
cam and allowing the rope to pop out. This left him hanging
from the cow's tail connected to his foot ascender. Hampered
by Dulcie's weight below him, Thomas could not get the Croll
back on rope.
The proper technique for releasing the cam on a frog chest
ascender is to push down on the top of the cam, not pull down
on the safety catch. Using the safety catch to down-climb is a
common mistake for users of the frog system, even among
those who have used that system for many years.
Suspension trauma, or harness-hang syndrome, can be
fatal. When you are suspended and immobile in your caving
harness, the circulation in your legs is restricted. This can
cause muscle damage and adverse effects on your blood
chemistry that become apparent when the pressure of the
harness is released, resulting in shock, unconsciousness, and
even death. Moving your legs while suspended helps to
improve circulation and reduces the risk of suspension trauma.

---------- Page 27 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
There are procedures and medications that can be used by
trained medical personnel to reduce the risk when taking a
suspended person off rope. If you do not have access to these
and have to take someone off rope, most authorities
recommend that you keep the person in an upright position
and do not remove the harness. Be prepared to treat for shock.
The first members of the cave rescue team reached the
scene about two hours after the 911 call. The entire rescue
operation took about three hours from their arrival at the
entrance to the departure of the second patient in the
ambulance. That's pretty fast for a wilderness rescue, but we
should all remember that help is a long time coming when
you're stuck in a cave - Dulcie was suspended for more than
five hours. What if the pit had been thousands of feet into the
cave instead of at the entrance, or the cavers had been hanging
in a larger waterfall? Know your system and practice those
change-overs.


********** 29 May
Island Ford Cave, Virginia
illness, stranded
Savonna Lessley and her nine-year-old niece, Harley
Patterson, entered Island Ford Cave on Sunday afternoon,
planning to spend a few hours exploring the cave as they had
done on several previous trips. After traversing most of the
cave, they were on the way out when Lessley began having
trouble walking. She suffers from multiple sclerosis, and while
she had not had any symptoms for some time, she apparently
experienced a flare-up in the cave.
Lessley realized what was happening and tried to find the
easiest route out of the cave, but was eventually unable to
continue. Holding her niece in her lap, and wrapping her in
extra clothing, she waited for help.
The two were reported missing the next day, and Lessley's
car was located near the cave. Rescuers began searching the
passages and soon found them. Patterson was able to walk and
was escorted out, but Lessley could not stand, and was carried
out in a litter. She reached the surface after 24 hours in the
cave.
1. Savonna Lessley, "Island Ford Cave Rescue," posted by
Sean Ryan on www.cavechat.org, 3 August 2005.
2. Kerry McQuone, "Cave rescue," WSLS News Channel 10,
www.wsls.com, 30 May 2005.
Comments: Always let someone know where you are going
and when you expect to return. A safe caving party should
include at least two adults. Cavers with chronic medical
conditions should use extra caution.


********** 8 June
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
caver fall, dislocated shoulder
Shortly after 11:30 p.m., Mark Andrich, Daniel Chailloux
(57), and Doug Warner were on their way back to camp after
spending eleven hours surveying when they came to a small
climb over some breakdown in the Giant Chiclets Room.
Chailloux used a small pocket on the face of a boulder as a
foothold. As he stepped up, Chailloux's foot slipped from the
slick, calcite-coated rock and he fell backward, striking his
right elbow sharply against the rock. As Chailloux fell,
Andrich reflexively grabbed him under the arms from behind
to keep him from tumbling down a hole between the boulders.
In the process of arresting the fall, Chailloux's right shoulder
was dislocated.
The dislocation was painful, but Chailloux was able to
move his arm and elbow and felt that he could make it back to
camp. He took some ibuprofen, and the cavers continued
slowly onward. They arrived at their camp at 12:30 a.m. and
decided to eat and sleep before starting out of the cave.
After resting for about six hours, the cavers packed up
their gear and headed for the entrance. Chailloux had not slept
well due to the pain of his injury, and took some more
ibuprofen, as well as some prescription anti-inflammatory
medication. He chose not to have his arm immobilized in a
sling, preferring to have the ability to use it when necessary
during the trip out. Andrich and Warner carried some of
Chailloux's equipment to lessen his load.
The team moved slowly through the cave, and Chailloux
climbed Apricot Pit and several other drops with minimal
assistance. Warner helped Chailloux negotiate some of the lips
by acting as a human bipod to hold the rope out from the lip
while Chailloux climbed over. There were also several rope
traverses along the route. Chailloux passed these by clipping
in to the traverse line with a pulley while other team members
pulled him across using lengths of webbing.
The cavers reached the surface at about 4:00 p.m. and
hiked back to the parking area. After reporting in at the park,
Chailloux was taken to a hospital in Carlsbad. An X-ray
confirmed the dislocation, which was reduced under mild
sedation. Chailloux was released after treatment.
1. Ron Miller, "Lechuguilla Cave Expedition Report, Near
East and Far East, June 1-9, 2005," Carlsbad Caverns
National Park, 9 June 2005.
2. Mark Andrich, Incident report, 5 February 2007.
Comments: The cavers were very experienced and well-
prepared, and the incident serves as a nice example of small
party self-rescue. Andrich notes that the accident occurred at
the end of a long day of surveying while on the way back to
camp, and that the cavers were on the seventh day of a week-
long expedition. The cavers had brought two small pulleys and
several 20-foot lengths of one-inch tubular webbing - items
that proved very useful in negotiating the rope traverses.
Warner's "human bipod" technique was also helpful.
Given the number of shoulder dislocations reported in
recent years, cavers (especially those with a history of
previous dislocations) should be aware that there is a simple
and non-invasive technique that may be effective in reducing a
dislocated shoulder in the field. The injured person should lie
face down on a waist-high rock or ledge, with the injured arm
hanging loosely down and holding a lightly weighted (about 8-
10 pounds) cave pack. Do not pull or twist the arm; let gravity
and relaxing muscles do the work. When used soon after the
dislocation, this method can be effective and has little risk of
harm.
If this method doesn't work, it is probably best to
immobilize the injured arm to reduce discomfort and prevent
further injury and to go to an emergency room for treatment.
There are a number of different methods for reducing a

---------- Page 28 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
dislocated shoulder, but most are beyond the scope of this
report, and are best left to trained medical personnel.


********** 11 June
Hellhole, West Virginia
rockfall
Dave West (57), Karen Willmes, and Mike Manke were on
a survey trip in Hellhole when Willmes showed West a
possible lead in some breakdown. West decide to enlarge the
opening by removing some rocks, As he removed the last rock
blocking the passage, it fell onto his left hand, breaking his
little finger and nearly severing the tip.
West climbed back up out of the breakdown and took off
his glove to examine the damage. The cavers had first aid kits
in their packs, including antibiotic ointment and gauze. After
applying the ointment, Manke fashioned a splint using a spoon
and a popsicle stick, bending the spoon to fit over the end of
West's injured finger and using the gauze to wrap the little
finger, third finger, popsicle stick, and spoon handle into a
package. A rubber surgical glove held the splint and dressing
in place.
The cavers had a snack and some water, and then started
for the entrance. They exited without incident, and went to a
hospital where West's finger was cleaned and dressed.
Dave West, Incident report, 22 September 2005.


********** 29 June
Talucah Cave, Alabama
rockfall
During the Summer 2005 NCRC cave rescue seminar, a
group of students and instructors conducted a training exercise
at Talucah Cave. The scenario for the exercise involved
hauling a patient out of the cave through a 35-foot pit entrance
at the Skylight Room. Under the supervision of the instructors,
the students constructed a hauling and lowering system at the
pit. Tymme Laun (41) volunteered to serve as the patient to
test the operation of the system by being lowered into the pit
and hauled back out.
After a safety check of the system, Laun was lowered into
the pit in his seat harness, assisted by two other students
serving as edge attendants. The lowering operation went
smoothly, and the team changed the system over to haul. Laun
was about 15 feet above the bottom of the pit when several
rocks broke free at the lip and fell down the drop. Cavers who
saw the rockfall shouted a warning, and Laun raised one arm
to protect himself. The first rock stuck his arm, and the blow
spun him around. A second rock struck his lower back.
Laun was quickly lowered to the floor and the cavers at the
bottom ran to help him. He was in a lot of pain, but was
conscious and had no head injuries. He was able to move with
assistance, SO the instructors decided to take him out through a
nearby horizontal entrance. Once on the surface, he was driven
to an emergency room for treatment. He suffered abrasions
and severe bruises on his arm and lower back, including a
bruised kidney and a bone bruise on his pelvic crest, but no
broken bones. He was released after treatment.
Anmar Mirza and Tymme Laun, Incident report, 7 July 2005.
Comments: Laun notes that he and the edge attendants
checked the lip area carefully for loose rocks before he was
lowered and did not see anything problematic. He feels that
the rope was moving across an unstable area but kept the rocks
in place during the lowering, then dislodged them when pulled
upward during the haul. Mirza writes that one of the edge
attendants thought he might have dislodged the rocks, but that
no one was certain.
Rockfall is always a danger at pits, and the risk is
increased when there are multiple ropes and cavers over the
edge. In a training exercise, students may focus on equipment
and procedures and may overlook an environmental hazard,
such as loose rock. Mirza points out that attendants should
only be at or over the edge when the patient is at or just below
the lip, to minimize the patient's exposure to anything they
may drop or dislodge. Moving ropes in a hauling or lowering
operation can also undermine and dislodge rocks. This
incident also illustrates the importance of keeping people out
of the fall zone at the bottom of a drop.


********** 5 July
Meeks Triple Well, Alabama
caver fall, lost control on rappel
Meeks Triple Well is a multi-drop cave system with five
pits and a total depth just over 300 feet. Sean Lewis (18) and
six other cavers from the 2005 NSS Convention entered the
cave and descended two closely-spaced pits of 25 and 19 feet
to reach the Triple Well - a set of parallel shafts, each about
120 feet in depth, that connect at the bottom. They rigged the
nicest of the three pits and rappelled to the floor.
Lewis was the third to descend, and carried the rope for the
next pit, a 60-footer. He had been told that it is a nice drop,
and was enthusiastic about finding it. Lewis looked around for
a lead and found the drain for the main pit going under a ledge
and into a tight crawlway.
Lewis went first, carrying the rope, and after about 30 feet
he came to the lip of a pit. He had been told that the way to the
last pit is tight, and the depth of this pit seemed about right.
There were supposed to be bolts for the rig point, but he could
not find any. The only natural rig point was a projection on the
wall that offered no good way to get on rope.
Aaron Atz, who was following Lewis, felt that something
about the pit did not look right and backed out of the crawl to
search for another route. Lewis initially had similar feelings,
but he began to consider the possibility that his pit was virgin,
which seemed likely because the mud on the ledge was
undisturbed. He decided that the pit was either virgin or was
the drop that he was seeking. Either way, he was committed to
rigging and descending it, even though he figured that the
others were probably getting impatient.
Lewis asked the others to tie a rope onto the end of the
rope in the main shaft SO that he could descend. The cavers
complied, and Brian Killingbeck delivered the end to Lewis.
Killingbeck pointed out that the rope would probably not
reach the bottom, but Lewis was not concerned. He had a
second rope attached to his harness, ready to use if needed.
The lip of the pit was undercut and there was nothing for
Lewis to grip or stand on as he went over. Once over the edge,
he could tell right away that the rope was too short. The knot

---------- Page 29 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
at the end was 30 or 40 feet from the floor of the pit, which
was a nice free drop into a good-sized room.
Lewis rappelled to the knot, attached his safety ascender
and foot ascender, and tied the second rope onto the end of his
rappel line. He had never crossed a knot on rope before, and
was figuring out what to do as he went. It took Lewis a while
to work through the procedure. At one point he was getting
frustrated and thought that he had seen enough of this pit and
was about ready to climb out. He finally succeeded in
transferring his weight to his rappel rack below the knot, and
removed his safety ascender from the rope.
As soon as Lewis began to descend he lost control of his
rappel and fell the remaining length of the drop, landing hard
and injuring his right ankle. Lewis thought the ankle might be
broken, and called up to Killingbeck to tell him what had
happened. He couldn't use his right foot, but he thought he
would be able to climb out using his left leg.
Killingbeck pulled up the rope and re-rigged the pit, SO that
Lewis wouldn't have to pass the knot on the way up. The other
cavers set up an anchor for the rope outside the crawl, SO that
they could begin climbing back up the main shaft. While they
arranged the ropes, Lewis used his rappel rack and some rope
to make a splint for his injured ankle.
Lewis climbed back up the 60-foot pit by frogging with
one leg. He struggled at the undercut lip for about 10 minutes
before getting over it with Killingbeck's help. The tight crawl
to the main shaft was difficult, and Lewis had to take off some
of his equipment to get back through.
After resting and having some food and water, Lewis
climbed the 120-foot shaft and the two smaller pits, then
squeezed through the entrance to reach the surface. Alan
Cressler helped him crawl and hobble down the mountain to
the truck. Deciding that the injury was probably "just a
sprain," the cavers drove to a local store where Lewis bought a
pair of crutches, then had dinner at a Chinese restaurant before
returning to the Convention. When his ankle was still painful
after several days, Lewis went to a doctor, who determined
that he had a sprained ligament and a broken fibula. A week
after the incident he had surgery to repair the injury.
Sean Lewis, Incident report, 24 July 2005.
Comments: Lewis was very lucky - cavers have been
seriously injured and even killed in similar incidents. When
passing a knot, or changing over from ascent to rappel, leave
your safety ascender or cow's tail attached until you have
transferred your weight to the rappel device and established
that you can control it during descent. Then, secure the rappel
device, remove the safety, and proceed.
In his report, Lewis offers the following analysis: "The
most obvious mistake I made was not tying off my rack. There
are other possible mistakes and contributing factors, however.
I may have had only four bars on the rope, which seems more
likely the more I consider the situation. The rope was
extremely slimy from being handled on the excessively muddy
lip of the pit, and gripping it with my hand as I slid out of
control was pointless. More abrasive gloves might have made
more of a difference. If I had had a little more time, I might
have tried to pull the rope around my back to arrest my fall,
but my reaction time was too slow. Further, had I worn more
supportive boots that reached my mid-shin rather than hiking
boots, my injury might have been less severe. Also, as the
knot tightened with my weight, it yielded some slack, which
may have initially contributed to my lack of control."
"I was fortunate that the result of my accident was a self
rescue. Here I was with a broken leg and sprained ankle 250
feet down a cave in Alabama. Brian said just the right thing to
me right after the accident: that we were going to get out of
here, and the best way for me to do it was under my own
power. All I remember was a sense of unreality and a strong
desire to get out."
"In retrospect, I can say some very important things that
you should remember in similar situations. If the pit feels
wrong, don't do it! It's not worth the risk even for the sake of
a virgin drop. Don't let impatience get to you. Always tie off
your rack when beginning a rappel after an on-rope maneuver.
Using six bars is also helpful. Always take time to think
through what you are doing."
Perceptive comments from a young, aggressive, and now
wiser, caver.


********** 21 July
Greenville Saltpeter Cave, West Virginia
caver fall
At about 3:00 p.m., a crew led by Roy Powers was
finishing the construction of a gate on the Water Entrance of
Greenville Saltpeter Cave in Monroe County when a group of
about 15 people came out of the cave entrance. They said that
one of their companions had hurt his knee and was on the way
out with the rest of their group. The gating crew still had two
of the angle-iron gate bars to weld into place, SO the members
of the caving party squeezed through the narrow gap.
At about 4:00 p.m., the remaining members of the party
emerged. One of them was obviously injured, and was
hopping along with help from his friends. The injured caver
said his name was Keaton, and that he had slipped and
jammed his foot between two rocks in the Ballroom, which is
quite some distance from the Water Entrance. He had injured
his knee when he pulled his foot out of the crack. Another
member of the party said that Keaton's knee had been injured
previously. Keaton hopped and hobbled back to the road,
where a member of the gating crew drove him back to his
group's vans.
The cave gating crew finished welding the gate and had
everything packed away by 7:00 p.m., about five and a half
hours after their anticipated 1:30 p.m. completion time. No
one in the crew had known anyone was in the cave. The
design of the gate leaves no opening for human entry or exit.
If the construction project had gone according to schedule, the
cavers would have been trapped inside.
Bob Liebman, "Another Accident in Greenville Saltpeter,"
The West Virginia Caver, v23n6, p. 8, December 2005.
Comments: The cavers were young men and women between
the ages of 18 to 20. They were equipped with kayaking
helmets and inexpensive headlamps. Many, including Keaton,
were wearing tennis shoes. Nevertheless, some people might
think that it is incumbent upon cave gate installers to make
certain that no one is inside before sealing a cave entrance.

---------- Page 30 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 23 July
Big Manhole Cave, New Mexico
rockfall
Steve Peerman was working at an ongoing dig project in
Big Manhole Cave, attempting to remove a suitcase-sized rock
from the wall. Using a 12-pound sledgehammer, he managed
to undermine the rock and separate it from the wall SO that it
was only attached at the top. Before striking the final blows,
he braced himself in the passage, placing his right leg in an
alcove and pressing his left foot against the wall. He expected
the rock to fall straight down, but when he struck it with the
hammer it rotated to the left as it fell, landing on his left foot
as it hit the floor.
Peerman extricated his foot from beneath the rock without
much difficulty, but could tell that something was wrong with
his foot. He climbed out of the dig shaft and into the main
chamber to assess the damage. His foot began to swell, SO he
decided to climb out of the pit entrance while he was still able.
Favoring the injured foot, he made the climb up to the
surface and went back to his vehicle. He took off his boot, put
an ice pack on the injured foot, and decided to rest for a while
with his foot elevated. After resting and having something to
eat, he drove back to Las Cruces that evening.
The next day he went to his doctor. An X-ray showed
broken bones, and he was referred to a podiatrist for treatment.
His foot was placed in a cast while the fracture healed.
Steve Peerman, "Accident report: Big Manhole Cave,
Saturday, 7/23/05," Southwestern Cavers, v45n5, September-
October 2005, p. 65.
Comments: Peerman writes, "I would remind others that rocks
don't always do what you expect as they fall." Several similar
incidents reported in this issue serve to prove his point.


********** 28 July
Alexander Cave, Arkansas
illness, heart attack in cave
As Gerald Elsner (59) and a companion hiked up the steep
hillside to Alexander Cave, Elsner felt an unusual "heaviness"
in his chest. The feeling passed as he rested outside the
entrance, SO he decided to continue with the trip. The two men
entered the cave and traveled through several thousand feet of
passage. After a while, Elsner began to feel nauseated, but he
kept going. The heaviness in his chest returned, and its
intensity increased. At about 2:15 p.m., his symptoms became
SO severe that he could no longer move. Elsner collapsed in a
small passage and told his companion to go for help.
It took the man about an hour to find his way back out of
the cave and get to a telephone. He called 911 at about 3:30
p.m. and reported that Elsner was in the cave and was having a
heart attack. Rescuers from local fire departments, rescue
squads, and caving organizations were called to the cave. They
soon located Elsner, who had been waiting for several hours.
He was conscious but in severe pain and still unable to move.
Rescuers assessed his condition and packaged him in a litter. It
took rescuers about four hours to move Elsner through the
cave to the entrance. There he was placed in a full-body
harness and hauled up the 30-foot entrance drop.
Elsner reached the surface at about 11:00 p.m. and was
taken by helicopter to a hospital, where surgeons placed a
stent in his coronary artery. He was released after several days
in intensive care. Full recovery was expected to take several
months. The rescue operation took more than eight hours and
involved about 35 people, including a number of local cavers.
1. Armando Rios, "Four-hour cave rescue successful," The
Baxter Bulletin, www.baxterbulletin.com, 30 July 2005.
2. Julie Stewart, "Stricken spelunker pulled from Stone
County cave in delicate 8-hour rescue," Arkansas
Democrat-Gazette, 30 July 2005, p. B-1.
3. Van Jensen, "Thought he'd die in cave, man says,"
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, 31 July 2005, p. B-1.
4. "Arkansas Units Rescue Man from Cave," Fire-Rescue
Magazine, v23n12, December 2005, p. 65.
5.
Associated Press, "Rescuers save experienced spelunker
who fell ill in Arkansas cave," The Baxter Bulletin,
www.baxterbulletin.com, 30 July 2005.
Comments: In recent years there have been a number of
fatalities from heart attacks during caving trips. Cavers should
know and heed the warning signs and symptoms, which
include: pain or uncomfortable pressure ("heaviness"),
tightness, or burning in the center of the chest lasting more
than a few minutes; pain spreading to the shoulder, neck, or
arms; shortness of breath; cold sweats; nausea; light-
headedness or fainting; increased or irregular heart rate; and
feelings of anxiety or impending doom. While CPR may not
always be practical or effective in a cave, all cavers should
consider becoming certified in the technique.


********** 2 August
Island Ford Cave, Virginia
caver fall, stuck
A 15-year-old girl was rescued from Island Ford Cave
after being stuck for about an hour. She was exploring the
cave with a group from Camp Kum-Bay-Ah in Lynchburg
when she slipped and became wedged in some breakdown
about 500 feet into the cave. Camp counselor Tom Watson
tried to help, but could not free her. One of her legs was
stretched out and wedged, and she could not get enough
leverage to pull it loose. Another counselor left the cave to call
for help, and led rescuers to the girl. They were soon able to
free her leg, and she was placed in a litter and carried out of
the cave. She was taken to a hospital where she was examined
and allowed to rest for several hours before being released.
Melissa Martin, "15 year old girl Gets Trapped in Cave,"
WSLS News Channel 10, www.wsls.com, 4 August 2005.


********** 2 August
Ten Mile Pit, Tennessee
stranded, inadequate equipment
At about 4:00 a.m. Tuesday morning, Brad Pruitt (21) and
his brother Blake (19) climbed down into the stair-stepped 75-
foot deep entrance of Ten Mile Pit to explore the cave at the
bottom. They were dressed in cotton pants and t-shirts, and
equipped with flashlights, but did not have helmets or
climbing equipment.

---------- Page 31 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
The men spent some time exploring the cave before
returning to the entrance. When they tried to climb out of the
pit, Blake found that he lacked the strength to pull himself
back up. He became stranded on a ledge about 25 feet below
the top.
Fortunately, Brad made it out and called 911 for help.
Rescuers rappelled into the pit and put a harness on the
stranded explorer, then hauled him up. He reached the surface
at 8:10 a.m. Neither brother was injured in the incident.
1. Jim Balloch, "Brothers' morning of cave exploration ends
in 911 call," Knoxville News Sentinel, 3 August 2005.
2. "Teenagers caught in cave," WVLT Volunteer TV,
www.volunteertv.com, 2 August 2005.
Comments: This cave was the scene of a similar but more
serious rescue on March 20, 2002, when a man fell and was
injured while trying to climb out of the pit. The cave is gated,
but in both incidents the men claimed it was unlocked.


********** 13 August
Spanish Cave, Colorado
injured knee while climbing chimney
Marty Morey (30) was on the third day of a caving
expedition at Marble Mountain when she hiked up to Spanish
Cave with a group of seven cavers who planned to make a
through-trip between the upper and lower entrances. Spanish
Cave is cold and wet, with an inside temperature around 34
degrees Fahrenheit, and is considered to be the most difficult
cave in Colorado. Morey was dressed for the conditions,
wearing a wetsuit under her outer clothing and carrying an
extra shirt in her pack.
The cavers gathered at the upper entrance, which is at an
elevation of 12,239 feet, shortly before 11:00 a.m. Frank's Pit,
a 140-foot drop, is a short distance inside, SO the cavers
donned their vertical gear before entering. The cave begins
with a tight and awkward chimney leading down to a "step-
across" where cavers must climb down from a ledge by
stepping onto a rock several feet away. The top of Frank's Pit
is a short distance beyond.
Morey was the last to enter, and had a little difficulty at the
"step-across" before catching up with the others at the top of
the pit. One of her companions, Richard Dieter, was having
trouble with his headlamp, and had become wet from a leaking
water bottle in his pack. Dieter was not wearing a wetsuit and
was already feeling cold, SO he decided to go out. After a
moment's hesitation, Morey decided to go with him. She told
the others of the change in plans, and started back toward the
entrance.
Morey caught up with Dieter at the "step-across." After
some effort, both cavers made it over to the ledge below the
chimney. Morey decided to go first, and began to climb up the
chimney. She was forcing herself up through the tight squeeze
when she felt two "pops" in her left knee, followed by
excruciating pain. Morey screamed, and Dieter grabbed her,
thinking that she was falling. This caused more pain, and
Dieter let go. Morey remained wedged in the chimney, trying
to catch her breath.
After a few minutes she tried to continue up the chimney
without using her injured leg. She struggled for several
moments, but only succeeded in getting her right leg stuck in
the crack. Dieter reached up and removed her boot, and she
was able to pull her foot free and back down to the ledge.
Over the next hour, Morey made three more attempts to
climb the chimney. Each time she reached a point where she
could not get any higher without using her left leg, which
would not support her weight. The cavers discussed the
situation, and Dieter offered to climb up and try to pull Morey
through. With no one below her, however, Morey was afraid
that she might slip back down the chimney and fall into the
pit. She decided to wait on the ledge while Dieter left the cave
to get help.
Dieter exited the cave at 1:15 p.m. and ran down to the
lower entrance. There, he encountered Mike Mobley and his
sons David and John, who had just hiked up to the cave for the
day. They did not have much caving experience or equipment,
but they did have a rope, some pulleys, and a construction-
type full body harness. The men quickly agreed to help. They
accompanied Dieter back to the upper entrance, arriving at
2:20 p.m.
David Mobley climbed down the chimney and helped
Morey put on the harness while the others rigged a hauling
system. When everything was ready, the men hauled Morey
up through the chimney. After about 30 minutes of effort, she
was on the surface.
Sleet had begun to fall, and Morey was now confronted
with a difficult hike back down the scree and talus slopes to
the camp, just below the timber line at 11,155 feet. She could
not bear any weight on her left leg. The slope was too steep
and treacherous for the others to carry her, SO she decided to
slide and "crab-walk" down, holding her left leg up to protect
her knee and foot. In this fashion she descended over 1,000
feet and covered the half-mile distance to the camp.
It was raining hard by the time they reached the camp.
Morey climbed into her tent, changes into dry clothes, and got
into her sleeping bag. It was too late in the day to start the
three-mile hike to the trail head. After some discussion, the
cavers decided to use Morey's cell phone to call for help.
After several calls they had arranged for a horse-packing team
to come up the following day to take Morey down. Morey
spent an uncomfortable night, with only Advil for pain
medication.
At 7:00 a.m. the next morning, the horse team called to say
that they would be at the camp site around noon. The cavers
broke camp and packed up their equipment, dividing Morey's
gear among them. Three cavers stayed with Morey to wait for
the horses while the rest of the group hiked off the mountain.
The horse team arrived just after noon and took Morey down
the six-mile horse trail. Twenty-seven hours after her injury,
Morey arrived at the parking area. A few days later she was
diagnosed with a torn ACL and later underwent surgery to
repair the damage.
1. Marty Morey, Incident report, 3 September 2005.
2. Marty Morey, "Getting Home From Spanish Cave,"
Rocky Mountain Caving, v22n4, Autumn 2005, pp. 21-27.

---------- Page 32 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 20 August
Ellisons Cave, Georgia
rockfall
Stephen Adcock (21), and Matthew Garrett (24) were
climbing tandem up the 586-foot Attic drop in Fantastic Pit
while three companions waited above. When Adcock reached
the lip, he transferred to a "pigtail" rope rigged next to the
main climbing line SO that he could climb over the lip without
being hindered by Garrett's weight below him. Garrett was on
the main line just below Adcock's feet, resting, with his right
arm raised and leaning against the wall.
Suddenly a large rock broke loose, bounced off the wall,
struck Garrett's arm, and fell past his face before dropping
into the pit. The impact made an impressive sound, but
fortunately there were no other cavers at the bottom. Garrett's
arm was bruised, but he considered himself lucky to have
escaped more serious injury.
Matthew Garrett, Incident report, 22 August 2005.
Comments: As Garrett and Adcock demonstrated, it's a good
idea for cavers climbing tandem to stay close together to
reduce the impact from falling objects, especially at the lip,
where the chance of rockfall is increased. When rockfall is
known to be likely, tandem climbing should be avoided.


********** 24 September
Empire Mine Cave, New Mexico
rockfall entrapment
A group consisting of eight people including cavers, park
rangers, and archaeologists, headed up to Empire Mine Cave
in Sequoia National Park to study and photograph mine ruins
from the 1870s. After rigging the entrance pit, Shane Fryer
descended, followed by Mindy Goldberg (25), who proceeded
past Fryer down a short chimney.
Dave Bunnell (53) entered the cave next. He rappelled the
initial drop without incident, but as he started to climb down
the chimney a large rock shifted, pinning his cave pack and his
leg against the wall. Bunnell managed to free himself, but the
rock had closed off most of the passage, trapping Goldberg at
the bottom.
Joel Despain hurried down to help. After about an hour of
work, the three men managed to move the rock and open up
just enough space for Goldberg to climb up, over, and out.
Several attempts to reposition the rock failed. Everyone exited
the cave safely and no one was injured in the incident.
Mindy Goldberg, Incident report, 30 September 2005.
Comments: Goldberg notes that Empire Mine Cave is indeed a
true cave, despite its name. It was briefly used as a silver
mine.


********** 1 October
Green Valley Cave, Alabama
caver fall
Andy Porter (35) and two other cavers were traversing a
canyon passage about 1,200 feet inside Green Valley Cave
when a two-foot-wide by three-foot-long section of a ledge
broke under Porter's feet. He dropped about six feet into a
canyon before he was able to arrest his fall. Porter was shaken,
but did not notice any injury, and continued into the cave.
Porter had undergone surgery on his arm two weeks before
the trip, and when he caught himself, he tore the incision back
open. He discovered the injury when he removed his shirt to
squeeze through a tight spot. Porter left the cave and went to
an emergency room where the wound was cleaned and closed
with stitches. The exposure to the cave environment resulted
in an infection of the wound, which was treated with
antibiotics.
Andy Porter, Incident report, 14 November 2005.
Comments: The ledge was made of cemented clastic deposits
of cobbles, mud, and sand. Porter notes that three other cavers
had crossed the ledge without incident before it broke
underneath him. He also observes that he probably should
have waited until the incision was completely healed before
going caving.


********** 2 October
Lost Creek Cave, Tennessee
rockfall
John Hickman (37) was leading a group of Vanderbilt
University students through Lost Creek Cave when they came
to a small climb-down. Hickman helped the students as they
made the climb, then started to descend. As he did so, one of
his handholds broke. A 50-pound rock fell and landed on his
foot, injuring it. Hickman was able to exit without assistance.
An X-ray later confirmed that he had broken his big toe.
John Hickman, Incident report, 21 October 2005.


********** 7 October
Flowing Stone Cave, Georgia
rockfall entrapment
A group of eleven cavers went to Flowing Stone Cave on
Pigeon Mountain, Georgia. The cave has a tight, excavated
entrance passage that drops ten feet before opening into a 224-
foot pit. The cavers decided to do the pit in shifts, with half the
cavers remaining on the surface while the others bounced the
pit, SO that the wait at the bottom would not be as long.
The first group of cavers rappelled and climbed the pit
without incident, and the second group then descended. Three
cavers were still on the bottom when Jeff Harrod (32) climbed
the rope and began squeezing through the tight passage at the
top. As he forced his body through the tightest part, a "fat" 30-
inch by 18-inch rock broke loose from the ceiling, rolled off
his back, and pinned his right leg at the ankle.
Other rocks began to break loose and fall into the pit. The
offset drop and tight entrance hampered communication and
the cavers had been relying on rope tugs to signal "off rope."
As a result, the cavers at the bottom were waiting near the
rope, watching for Harrod's signal. He yelled "Rock!" and the
cavers below dove for cover as falling rocks hit the bottom
and shattered on impact.
Harrod tried to pull his leg out but it was firmly pinned. He
called out to the surface, a few feet away. The first group had
just left to hike down the mountain, but a caver from Harrod's

---------- Page 33 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
group heard his cry and called them back to help. Harrod
couldn't reach the rock, SO another caver was lowered by his
ankles to put a sling around it. The cavers on the surface were
then able to hold the rock in place while they pulled the
climbing rope out of the pit.
When they tried to pull the rock out, it rolled painfully
onto Harrod's ankle, and they were forced to stop. Harrod was
also afraid that more rocks would collapse as the larger one
was removed. As the cavers pondered the situation, the rock
suddenly shifted, and they were able to pull it out. Harrod was
quickly extricated and checked for injuries. His ankle was
bruised but not broken.
The cavers cleared the remaining loose rocks in the
entrance passage and at the lip. Once they felt that the pit was
safe, they lowered the rope to the waiting cavers, checking for
damage as they fed it into the pit. The three cavers at the
bottom ascended without incident.
1. Jeff Harrod, Incident report, 25 November 2005.
2. Jeff Harrod, "Trapped in Flowing Stone Cave,"
Birmingham Grotto Newsletter, v35n11, November 2005,
p. 111.
Comments: Harrod notes that he was the largest caver in the
group. Cavers would do well to be suspicious of excavated
passages and entrances, which may be more likely to collapse
than those occurring naturally. Flowing Stone Cave was dug
open by cavers in 2002.


********** 29 October
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave, Wyoming
lost, hypothermia, inadequate equipment
Brigham Young University senior Christy Martinsen went
to Fossil Mountain Ice Cave with a group of friends from
school. One member of the group had been to the cave before,
and planned to lead the group on a through-trip from the upper
Ice Cave entrance to the lower Wind Cave entrance. The trip
requires several rappels and climbs, and finding the correct
route through the lower section of the cave to the Wind Cave
entrance can be challenging.
About three hours into the trip, the cavers realized that
they could not find the exit. After rappelling several drops just
inside the upper entrance, they had pulled down their rope and
could not go back. The cavers spent hours searching the lower
levels of the cave, retracing their steps, and looking for the
connection to the Wind Cave entrance. Their food and water
were eventually consumed, and their lights began to fail as the
batteries were exhausted. Along the way, Martinsen swapped
her boots for water sandals while wading through Crotch Lake
and lost the boots in the water when her pack broke. Her feet
were very cold, and she became hypothermic.
By the time they found the correct passage and emerged
from the Wind Cave entrance, the group had been
underground for over 16 hours. About 18 inches of snow had
fallen while the group was in the cave, and Martinsen hiked
several miles down the valley to the trailhead in her wet
sandals. She arrived back at her apartment at 6:00 a.m. Sunday
morning, still cold and exhausted, and collapsed into bed.
A few hours later, Martinsen's roommates woke her for
church, and she told them what had happened. Martinsen's
feet were still painful, and she did not feel well, SO they
convinced her to go to the hospital. She was treated for
pneumonia, hypothermia, and nerve damage in her toes. She
also had extremely elevated enzyme levels, indicating muscle
tissue breakdown, and was hospitalized and treated for three
days before being released.
Amanda Keisel, "Lost: Students stuck in ice caves for 16
hours," Idaho Scroll, Brigham Young University,
www.byui.edw/ccroll, 6 December 2005.
Comments: The cavers should not have pulled down their
ropes without being sure of the route. They could have made
sure by going into the Wind Cave entrance and having a look
before hiking up to the Ice Cave entrance. Martinsen would
have been better off to keep her boots on her feet, along with
wool or synthetic socks or neoprene booties. The cave has
been the scene of many similar incidents, with several
resulting in rescues. It is listed in several hiking guides, and is
a popular destination for inexperienced and poorly equipped
spelunkers. The connection to the lower entrance is somewhat
obscure.


********** 5 November
Carroll Cave, Missouri
caver fall
Mike Freeman and four other cavers entered Carroll Cave
to carry supplies to an underground camp and to continue the
survey of lower Thunder River. They were enroute to the
camp site when they came to Thunder Falls. To pass the falls,
the cavers climbed onto a ledge and crawled across a steep
mud slope above a funnel-shaped hole to reach a ladder
leading down to the stream.
As Freeman crawled across the slope his heavy pack
shifted, throwing him off balance. He lost his footing and slid
about 20 feet down the slope and into the hole, rolled around
its rim, and fell through the opening, dropping 16 more feet to
the stream. Freeman landed on his side in the water, which
broke his fall. He was shaken, but not seriously injured, and
was able to continue the trip, complaining only of some minor
discomfort.
Rita Worden, Incident report, 17 July 2006.
Comments: Worden writes that the incident "was a big wake-
up call for us all." The traverse across the slope was later
modified to make it safer by excavating a path across the
slope. Cavers should consider rigging and using a traverse line
in such situations, especially for frequent travel routes in
project caves, where heavy packs may increase the risk.


********** 4 December
Pettijohns Cave, Georgia
lost
Heath Courtney and Chuck Rowland were exploring
Pettijohns Cave, and were well into the back section of the
cave when they heard voices down the passage ahead calling
for help. They investigated and found two flashlight-carrying
teenagers who had entered the cave the day before and
become lost. Courtney and Rowland gave the stranded pair

---------- Page 34 ----------
2005 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
some food and water and then led them out. They had been
lost for more than 24 hours.
Heath Courtney, Incident report, 4 December 2005.
2004 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 25 January
Forty Fathom Grotto, Florida
lost consciousness, rapid decompression
Linda Sanner was diving with her husband and an
instructor at Forty Fathom Grotto when she lost consciousness
at a depth of about 118 feet. According to reports, Sanner
floated to the surface where other divers pulled her from the
water. She was not breathing and showed signs of
decompression injury from the uncontrolled ascent.
Bystanders called for an ambulance while other divers
administered CPR. Paramedics arrived and transported Sanner
to a hospital for treatment.
Mabel Perez, "Scuba diver almost dies in Grotto, Ocala Star-
Banner, 27 January 2004.


********** 16 March
Cenote Dos Ojos, Yucatan, Mexico
fatality, lost consciousness, contaminated gas
Canadian diver Clement Pouillot was diving with a
companion in Cenote Dos Ojos when he lost consciousness.
He was brought to the surface but could not be revived.
Reports stated that analysis of the air remaining in Pouillot's
tank found that it was contaminated with carbon monoxide.
The source was reported to be a faulty compressor used to fill
Pouillot's tanks. Other divers who used the same air station
were also affected, and a second fatality occurred on the same
day at Nohoch Nah Chich.
1. "Death of Clement Pouillot," www.scubaboard.com, 17
March 2004.
2.
"Canadian diver dies in Cenotes," www.thedecostop.com,
23 March 2004.


********** 16 March
Nohoch Nah Chich, Yucatan, Mexico
fatality, lost consciousness, contaminated gas
According to reports, Geoff Kalavant was reported missing
when he failed to return from a solo dive to the Pet Cemetery
section of Nohoch Na Chich. His body was retrieved, and it
was reported that an investigation determined that his tanks
were contaminated with carbon monoxide. The report
indicated that Kalavant had filled his tanks at the same air
station used by Clement Pouillot before his fatal dive at
Cenote Dos Ojos on the same day.
1. "Death of Clement Pouillot," www.scubaboard.com, 17
March 2004.
Comments: It's the first rule of safe caving: always tell
someone where you are going and when you expect to return.
Fortunately for the lost cavers, Pettijohns is a very popular
cave with frequent visitation.
2.
"Canadian diver dies in Cenotes," www.thedecostop.com,
23 March 2004.
Comments: Later reports indicated that a number of divers
experienced headaches and other problems after using tanks
filled at the same station used by Pouillot and Kalavant.


********** 8 April
Cueva Oztoquito, Puebla, Mexico
fatality, exceeded training, inadequate
equipment, out of air
On Thursday, April 8, Mariano Fuentes (32), Jose Montiel,
and Alberto Maldonado entered the cave through the 125-
meter entrance drop and proceeded upstream about 500 meters
to an unexplored sump, while expedition member Fernando
Chávez and his young son remained on the surface in support.
Fuentes and other members of the Draco caving club had been
exploring the caves near San José Balvanera for several years,
and were especially interested in finding a connection between
Oztoquito and Oztoque, two caves separated by a distance of
about one kilometer on the surface. Fuentes planned to dive
the sump in Oztoquito, hoping to make a connection to Cueva
del Oztoque.
With the help of his companions, Fuentes entered the sump
using modified open-water scuba equipment and two line reels
loaded with polypropylene line. Montiel and Maldonado
remained at the sump pool with one reel, feeding out the line
as Fuentes explored. If necessary, Fuentes planned to attach
his second reel of line to the end of the first to continue.
Fuentes' first attempt on the sump ended after about 15
minutes when his guideline became tangled, forcing him to
return to the sump pool. After untangling the line, Fuentes
reentered the sump for a second attempt. Eventually, Montiel
fed out the last of the line on his reel, and the two support
cavers were left to wait while Fuentes explored.
After some time, they decided that Fuentes must have
passed the sump and was probably exploring dry passage on
the other side. Several hours passed with no sign of Fuentes,
and the two cavers became concerned. Thinking that Fuentes
might be stranded on the other side of the sump, Montiel left
the cave to rig the Oztoque entrance pits. He hoped that
Fuentes would be able to get out through the other side of the
system. Maldonado waited at the Oztoquito sump, in case
Fuentes should return by that route.
Upon reaching the surface, Montiel asked Chavez to call
for help, then continued to Oztoque to rig the cave and look
for Fuentes. Maldonado eventually left Oztoquito and
followed Montiel to help rig and to search for Fuentes. When
they reached the bottom of Oztoque, however, they found no
sign of their missing companion.

---------- Page 35 ----------
2004 Cave Diving Incident Reports
When Fuentes failed to return from the sump, his
companions notified authorities and called fellow cavers for
help. They were able to contact a cave diving instructor from
Mexico City, who came to the cave and made a dive but was
unable to find Fuentes in the extremely low, silty, passage.
Two cave diving instructors from Quintana Roo were flown
in, but they were also unable to locate the missing caver.
As word of the incident spread, more than 70 people
gathered at the base camp established near the cave entrance
to participate in the rescue. A unit of the Mexican Army,
members of the National Guard, state police, City of Puebla
firemen and paramedics, four state delegations of the Red
Cross rescue organization, and numerous cavers and friends of
Mariano were among the people assisting in the effort. The
press arrived as well, with three satellite television trucks, a
radio station, and several newspapers represented.
On Monday, April 12, the Mexican Consulate in Austin
arranged special visas for travel into Mexico, and the
following day U.S. sump divers R. D. Milhollin and Steve
Ormeroid arrived at the site. In a series of dives that lasted
until the following afternoon they were able to locate Fuentes'
body floating in a lake chamber on the far side of the sump.
An examination of Fuentes' gear found all equipment in
place, the valves open and regulators fully functional, but the
air cylinders were empty. The sump divers were unable to
bring Fuentes' body back through the underwater restriction
without great difficulty, and upon consultation Fuentes' family
elected to leave his body in the chamber.
1. R. D. Milhollin, "Recovery Effort at Oztoquito Cave,
Puebla Mexico," The Maverick Bull, v17n5, May 2004.
2. Steve Ormeroid, Incident report, 29 September 2006.
3. Grupo University Espeleologico UNAM, Informe Oficial
Del Rescate De La Cueva De Oztoquito,
www.montanismo.org.mx, 28 May 2004.
4. José Montiel, Primer Reporte de la A. B. Draco,
www.montanismo.org.mx, April 2004.
5. Alberto Brave Maldonado, Accidente en el Oztoquito,
www.montanismo.org.mx, 11 May 2004.
Comments: The incident summary above was adapted from a
report by R. D. Milhollin, who participated in the recovery
effort. Milhollin observed that while Fuentes was an
experienced open-water diver, he was not certified in cave
diving. He did not have the necessary training, experience, and
equipment for safe diving in the silty and constricted
environment of the Oztoquito sump.
Rescue diver Steve Ormeroid contributed the following
analysis, based on his personal examination of the victim and
his equipment, along with information provided by others
involved in the recovery operation. Ormeroid writes:
"Three of the five major rules of cave diving (NSS-CDS
Accident Analysis) were violated: 1) Be trained; 2) Use a
continuous guideline; and 3) Reserve at least two-thirds of
your air to exit.
"The victim had no cave diving training. According to
those who knew him, the victim had been given some cursory
information about the equipment and techniques in
conversation from a European cave diver. The equipment
configuration used by the victim was a poorly modified open
water diver arrangement. The water visibility was extremely
limited, the cave passage was silty and very low, and the water
temperature was in the range of 50 degrees Fahrenheit. All of
these factors made the operation of his equipment difficult and
certainly hazardous in an emergency situation.
"While the victim did in fact run a guideline, the manner in
which it was used was a tremendous hazard. The line was
pulled behind the diver, while being un-reeled at the sump
opening in air. This made it impossible to correctly make
wraps and maintain directional control of the line. The line
was also a floating polypropylene, which created a major
hazard of entanglement. The first rescue divers on the scene
encountered great difficultly dealing with this line in the
extremely low visibility.
"According to information provided at the scene, the
victim made two, if not three attempts to penetrate the sump
without changing tanks. Based on our dives, we concluded
that at the start of his last dive, the victim's air supply was at a
low level that could not have allowed for emergency."


********** 12 June
Eagles Nest, Florida
two fatalities, silt, lost guideline, out of air
John Robinson Jr. (36) and Craig Simon (44) began their
dive into Eagle's Nest sink at about 1:00 p.m. on Saturday
afternoon. Their dive plan called for 40 minutes of bottom
time, with a penetration of 1,800 feet at a maximum depth of
300 feet, and a total dive time of two and a half hours,
including decompression. They were equipped with scooters
for propulsion and stage tanks for decompression.
The two divers entered the sink, submerged, and
descended about 40 feet, then dropped through a chimney into
the Ballroom, a 150-foot-wide chamber with large passages
leading both upstream and downstream. The men followed the
Downstream Tunnel, which descends gradually to a depth of
200 feet before dropping steeply down The Pit to 290 feet, and
then opening into a series of large rooms and passages. They
planned to spend some time exploring the rooms beyond The
Pit, and then make their way back out, with a decompression
stop at 200 feet and another in the entrance pool. They staged
their decompression tanks as they made their way into the
cave.
When the divers had not returned by 3:30 p.m., another
diver noticed their absence and became concerned. There was
no sign of Robinson or Simon at their decompression stage
locations, SO the diver left the water and called for help.
Rescue divers came to the sink and began searching for the
missing men. Robinson's body was found at about 2:00 p.m.
on Sunday, about 1,100 feet into the cave on the main line in
the Downstream Tunnel. His scooter was missing and his air
tanks were empty. Divers removed the body from the cave.
The search for Simon was suspended Sunday evening due
to bad weather, and resumed on Monday afternoon. Simon's
body was located on Tuesday, in a small side passage off the
Downstream Tunnel known as John's Pocket. Searchers first
discovered Robinson's scooter, covered in silt and lying on the
floor of the room, and then found Simon's body and scooter
floating on the ceiling, entangled in line.
In the course of the search, recovery diver Larry Green
suffered decompression sickness after diving to 300 feet on

---------- Page 36 ----------
2004 Cave Diving Incident Reports
three consecutive days. He was treated in a decompression
chamber overnight, and released the next day.
1. Patricia Kim, "1 Dead, 1 Missing After Cave Dive,"
Tampa Tribune, 14 June 2004.
2. Logan Neill and Aaron Sharockman, "Hernando cave
claims diver," St. Petersburg Times, 14 June 2004.
3. "Fateful Expedition in Eagles Nest Pond," Bay News,
baynews9.com, 14 June 2004.
4. Dan DeWitt and Duane Bourne, "Lost diver found in inky
nook," St. Petersburg Times, 16 June 2004.
Comments: Both men were certified cave divers with
appropriate training and equipment, and both had dived at
Eagle's Nest previously. Some reports speculated that the men
may have inadvertently stirred up the silt, lost contact with the
guideline, and become lost and separated, exhausting their air
supply before they could find the guideline and the way back
to their stage tanks.


********** 21 August
Devils Ear, Florida
fatality, out of air, exceeded training
Brian Luke Tindale (24) and three friends arrived at Ginnie
Springs at about 8:30 p.m. Friday evening, set up their camp
for the weekend, and then went to Devil's Ear spring. Two
members of the group paddled a canoe around the spring
while another snorkeled behind them. Tindale donned scuba
gear and went diving.
Tindale made several brief descents, visiting the Little
Devil and Devil's Eye entrances, and then surfacing to talk
with his friends. According to reports, he had only about 500
psi in his air tank and carried a single D-cell flashlight. At
about 2:00 a.m., Tindale told the others that he had about 12
minutes of air left, and that he would not be down long. He
then submerged and swam into the Devil's Ear entrance.
When he failed to return, his friends went for help. A Ginnie
Springs diving instructor entered the spring, found Tindale's
body just inside the cave entrance, wedged in a dome, and
brought it to the surface.
1. Heather Sorentrue, "Diver Drowns in Area Cave," WCJB
Channel 20 News, www.wcjb.com, 23 August 2004.
2. Deborah Ball, "Tallahassee man dies at area springs,"
Gainesville Sun, 24 August 2004.
3. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 26 August 2004.
Comments: Reports stated that Tindale was certified for open
water diving, but had no cave diving training or equipment.


********** 9 December
Sac Actun, Yucatan, Mexico
two fatalities, lost, out of air
A group of nine divers, including a guide, went to the
Cenote Calimba entrance of Sistema Sac Actun. The group
had been diving together for several days, including one
earlier dive in another part of the Sac Actun system. Their
dive plan for the day called for a traverse between the Cenote
Calimba and Cenote Bosh Chen entrances along a route
notable for small but well-decorated passages and several
junctions.
The divers divided themselves into two teams. The first
team, comprised of four divers and the guide, planned to enter
at Cenote Calimba, follow fixed lines to the Cenote Bosh
Chen entrance, and return via the same route. Along the way
they would encounter two junctions, where they planned to
leave markers to indicate the correct exit route. The second
team, comprised of Kent Hirsch (53), Michael Nast (37),
William Downey (53), and Jeanne Downey (53), planned to
enter after the first team and travel along the same route,
taking pictures, and turn back at an appropriate time rather
than making the complete traverse to the Bosh Chen entrance.
The divers discussed the plan at length before the dive,
reviewing a map and making diagrams of the junctions that
would be encountered along the route.
The first team entered Cenote Calimba and proceeded
downstream through about 1,500 feet of small, well-decorated
passage to reach the first junction, known as "the Snap &
Gap." At that point, the main line from Cenote Calimba ends.
A second line leaves the junction and enters a passage called
the Paso de Lagarto, which leads to the Cenote Grande and
Cenote Ho Tul entrances. The ends of the two lines are
separated by a gap of about 20 feet. The Snap & Gap is a 20-
foot section of line that is left coiled at the end of the Calimba
line and used to bridge the gap and connect to the Paso de
Lagarto line.
The first team connected the two lines and proceeded
about 65 feet down the Paso de Lagarto line to a second
junction, where the Lagarto line makes a sharp turn to the
right, while another passage leads left to the Bosh Chen
entrance. There, the divers used a jump reel to connect to a
fixed line in the Bosh Chen passage. Once again, they marked
the junction to indicate the correct route for their return. They
then proceeded to the Bosh Chen entrance where they surfaced
briefly before starting back through the cave to retrace their
route.
The second team, comprised of Hirsch, Nast, and the
Downeys, had entered the cave behind the first and followed
the same route, making the connection to the Paso de Lagarto
line at the Snap & Gap, following that line for 65 feet, and
switching to the Bosh Chen line according to plan. After
following the Bosh Chen passage for some distance, they
turned their dive and started back toward Cenote Calimba.
When they reached the junction with the Paso de Lagarto
line they needed to turn right to follow the line to the Snap &
Gap and the Calimba line. Instead, they went left, following
the Paso de Lagarto line toward the Cenote Grande and
Cenote Ho Tul entrances. They did not realize their mistake
until they reached the end of the Paso de Lagarto line, some
1,400 feet downstream from the Snap & Gap junction.
Two days earlier, all four divers had been on a dive from
the Cenote Grande entrance upstream to the Snap & Gap via
the Paso de Lagarto, and they knew that the end of the line
leading to Cenote Grande and Cenote Ho Tul line was
somewhere in the room about 65 feet from the end of the Paso
de Lagarto line. The Cenote Grande entrance was only about
700 feet away, and the Cenote Ho Tul entrance was somewhat
closer. Hirsch attached the line from his safety reel to the end
of the Lagarto line and began searching for the Cenote Grande
line. Nast, however, started back upstream along the Paso de

---------- Page 37 ----------
2004 Cave Diving Incident Reports
Lagarto, with Jeanne Downey following. Bill Downey started
after them, and Hirsch abandoned his search, picking up his
spool and following.
The four divers made their way back along the Paso de
Lagarto to the Snap & Gap and the Calimba line. As they
traveled along the Calimba passage, they became separated.
Bill and Jeanne Downey were in the lead, with Hirsh and Nast
a short distance behind. Bill Downey's air supply began to run
low, and he and Jeanne were forced to share. They reached the
Calimba entrance and the surface with their tanks almost
exhausted.
Meanwhile, the first team had made their way back
through the Bosh Chen passage, made the correct turn to reach
the Snap & Gap, and followed the Calimba line to the surface.
When the Downeys surfaced and told them what had
happened, divers from the first team went back into the cave
2005 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 4 January
Peacock Springs III, Florida
fatality, diving beyond training, lost, out of air
David Jones (34), Alan Heck, and Gene Page entered
Peacock Springs III at about 1:00 p.m. for a dive to an area
called Hendley's Castle. Each diver carried one travel tank
and one stage bottle. Jones and Page dropped off their stage
bottles about 500 feet into the cave, while Heck kept his with
him.
Following the permanent line, the divers traversed about
1,000 feet of passage and reached the Castle at a depth of 184
feet without incident. As they started out of the cave, however,
Jones signaled to the others that he was out of air. He had used
up his air more quickly than expected, and did not have
enough to get back to his stage bottle. Heck had carried both
of his tanks to the Castle, and gave his stage bottle to Jones,
who took the tank and signaled that he was OK.
The three divers continued, with Jones in the lead, but
Page developed a problem and had to stop. Heck stopped to
help while Jones continued toward the entrance. Page's
problem was soon resolved, and he and Heck continued their
exit. When they reached the stage location, Jones was not
there, and his bottle was sitting unused. The men continued,
expecting to catch up with Jones at the entrance, where all
three divers would need to decompress.
When they reached the cave entrance, however, there was
still no sign of Jones. Heck went back into the cave to look for
Jones while Page completed his decompression and left the
water to get help. At about 2:30 p.m., just as rescue divers
were entering the water, Heck surfaced and reported that he
had found Jones' body in a side passage about 300 feet from
Hendly's Castle, and clipped it to the guideline. The two
rescue divers retrieved the body while Heck finished his
decompression.
1. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 7 January, 2005.
to help Hirsch and Nast. Unfortunately, they were too late.
Hirsch and Nast were found together, and 250 feet short of the
entrance, their tanks empty. The men had drowned after
exhausting their air supply.
1. Cindy Stauffer, "Two experienced cave divers dead in
Cancun scuba diving accident," Lancaster New Era, 12
December 2004.
2. Terrie Morgan-Besecker, "Diving accident claims former
ADA," Wilkes-Barre Times Leader, 14 December 2004.
3. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 27 January 2005.
Comments: All of the divers were properly equipped and
certified for the dive. It was also reported that the Snap & Gap
has been replaced with a permanent fixed line.
2. "Newberry man dies in cave," High Springs Herald, 6
January 2005.
3. Yvette Hannon, "Diver drowns in Peacock Springs,"
Suwanee Democrat, 6 January 2005.
Comments: Jones swam ahead of the other divers, and
apparently left the main line to the entrance at a junction
where the main line continued while a second line led to the
left and down a side passage. The two lines are separated by a
"jump gap" to help prevent mistakes, but Jones apparently did
not notice the gap. He followed the second line down the
wrong passage and died when his air supply ran out.
Jones was certified as a cavern diver, and was reportedly
enrolled in a cave diving course at the time of his death. He
was not yet certified for full cave diving at the level required
for the dive to Hendley's Castle. Page was also reported to be
cavern-certified, but not certified for full cave diving. Heck
was reported to be certified as a full cave diver and an
instructor for the "Intro to Cave Diving" course.


********** 12 May
Devils Eye, Florida
equipment problem
Peter Doege entered Devil's Eye spring and swam about
750 feet to an area known as the Parallel Lines, crossing three
"jumps" or junctions en route. While he was connecting his
line at the third jump, he bumped his tank against the ceiling.
The contact caused one of the burst disks on the tank to start
leaking. Doege heard the sound of escaping gas, and quickly
closed a valve to isolate the leaking tank and preserve his
remaining air. He continued to breathe from the leaking tank
as he prepared to make a quick exit from the cave.
Leaving his diving reels in place, Doege headed for the
entrance. With help from the out-flowing current, he made it
back to his decompression bottle with about 2,400 psi in his
good tank and 1,200 psi in the leaking tank. He completed his
decompression successfully and left the water without further
incident.

---------- Page 38 ----------
2005 Cave Diving Incident Reports
Peter Doege, Incident report, 21 December 2005
Comments: Burst disks are used to protect against overfilling
and rupturing a tank. Doege checked the tank after the dive
and found that the burst disk assembly had not been properly
tightened and checked before the dive. It had worked loose,
and the impact with the ceiling caused it to leak. He notes that
the isolation manifold on his rig allowed him to protect his
good tank from the effects of the leak and permitted a safe
exit.


********** 19 August
Dogwood Spring, Florida
fatality, free diving in cave entrance
Matthew Lund (20) apparently drowned while free diving
alone in Dogwood Spring. His body was found in the entrance
of the underwater cave after he was reported missing by his
girlfriend. She had awakened early Saturday morning and
discovered that Lund had left their campsite, taking his mask,
snorkel, and swimsuit. When his car was located near the
spring, rescue divers were called to search the cave. They
found his body at about 8:15 a.m.
1. Alice Wallace, "Man found dead in Ginnie Springs cave,"
The Gainesville Sun, 21 August 2005.
2. Grayson Kamm, "UNF Student Drowns While Cave
Diving," First Coast News, www.firstcoastnews.com 21
August 2005.
3.
Associated Press, "UNF Student Dies in Cave Diving
Mishap," First Coast News, www.firstcoastnews.com, 21
August 2005.
4. Adam L. Neal, "MCHS grad dies during diving excursion
in North Florida," Stuart News, www.TCPalm.com, 22
August 2005.
Comments: Lund was apparently practicing an extreme
version of snorkeling - holding his breath and swimming as
deep as 60 feet. He was found with a small headlamp attached
to the strap of his mask. A gash on his head indicated that he
had struck his head on the rock at some point during his fatal
dive. According to reports, Lund's friends said that he
engaged in this type of diving frequently, and had dived at the
spring "dozens of times" before.
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431


********** 11 September
Eagles Nest, Florida
decompression sickness, incorrect gas mixture,
out of air, rapid ascent
Judi Bedard (48) and Rudy Banks entered Eagle's Nest
sink at about 4:30 p.m. planning a deep dive on mixed gasses.
They left oxygen tanks at 30 feet for decompression, and
breathed a nitrogen-oxygen mixture as they descended to 130
feet, where they switched to tanks filled with a mixture of
nitrogen, oxygen, and helium. Bedard immediately began to
have problems, and switched back to her nitrox tank and
began to ascend. Banks realized that Bedard was having
trouble and becoming disoriented, and he tried to help her.
Bedard lost consciousness at about 100 feet as Banks
brought her to the surface, and by the time they reached 60
feet she had stopped breathing. Banks decided to skip
decompression to get her out of the water. Bystanders helped
pull Bedard from the spring and administered CPR as others
summoned an ambulance. She was not breathing and had no
pulse. Rescuers were able to get her breathing again, and she
was taken to a hospital, where she was reported to be in
critical condition.
Bedard suffered multiple injuries from the dive and the
rapid ascent, including arterial gas embolisms, multiple
cardiac arrests, and kidney failure. According to reports, she
spent almost four months in the hospital, and was discharged
in January, 2006.
1. Rick Gershman and Saundra Amrhein, "Cave diver pulled
to surface barely alive," St. Petersburg Times, 13
September 2005.
2. "Diver pulled from sink; in critical condition," Hernando
Today, 12 September 2005.
3. Rick Gershman, "Racing for life, 130 feet down," St.
Petersburg Times, 29 September 2005.
4. Rick Gershman, "Better access urged for dive rescuers,"
St. Petersburg Times, 2 October 2005.
Comments: An investigation determined that the gas in
Bedard's tri-mix tanks was almost entirely helium, with
almost no oxygen, and that the tanks were unevenly
pressurized. In addition, the isolation valve between the tanks
was incorrectly left closed. One report stated that the
investigators concluded that the tanks were improperly filled
and that Bedard had not followed the proper safety protocols
to check her tanks and gas mixture before the dive.

---------- Page 39 ----------
2004 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 10 January
La Joya, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
fall at cave entrance
A group of young people climbed down into the large
doline know as La Joya ("The Jewel") located near the village
of Estacion Ventura to explore a cave entrance visible on the
wall of the 400-meter by 500-meter sink. At about 11:00 a.m.,
just as they reached the entrance, one of the explorers, a 26-
year-old man, slipped and fell. He tumbled about nine meters
before coming to rest at the top of a 120-meter drop. He
sustained numerous injuries in the fall, including head and
facial trauma, as well as fractures of the right femur, left tibia,
and left fibula.
One of the other members of the group went for help, and
members of the cave rescue group of the Mexican Red Cross
responded. Due to the remote location, it took several hours to
assemble personnel and equipment at the scene and begin the
rescue operation. The injured man was placed in a litter and
hauled to the lip of the doline, then carried to a waiting
ambulance. He was treated for hypothermia and transported to
a hospital. The rescue operation was concluded at about 2:00
a.m.
Antonio Aguirre Álvarez, "Reporte de Accidente en 'La Joya'
SLP, 10 de Enero del 2004," Espeleo Rescate Mexico,
ermexico.tripod.com, undated.


********** 18 January
pit near Rancho Cielo, Tamaulipas, Mexico
fatality, fell into roadside pit
Cornelieo Garcia (30) reportedly was on his way home
from a party when he strayed off the path and fell into a 150-
foot pit. He was killed by the fall.
When Garcia did not return home as expected, friends and
family members began searching for him along the old road
between Gómez Farías and Alta Cima in the El Cielo
Biosphere reserve. When they came to the pit, about 200 yards
from the junction for Rancho Cielo, they noticed that the area
around the lip had been disturbed, but could not see the
bottom. After several days of searching found no other sign of
the missing man, Garcia's brother called Jean Muzquiz, a
caver in Mante, and asked him to come look in the pit.
Muzquiz and several other cavers went to the cave,
accompanied by members of the Fire Department. They rigged
and descended the pit, and immediately located Garcia's body
at the bottom. It was recovered from the pit.
Jean Louis Lacaille Muzquiz, Incident report, 22 January
2004.
Comments: The eight-foot diameter pit entrance is just a few
feet away from a four-wheel-drive road at a point where the
road makes a curve. Garcia, who was reported to have been
drinking before his departure from Gómez Farías, apparently
missed the curve and walked into the pit.


********** 18 January
unnamed sinkhole near Apopka, Florida
woman swallowed by sinkhole
Linda Sharp (57) was walking her dog along the road near
her home in Apopka, Florida when a section of pavement
collapsed beneath her, and she fell into a sinkhole. "I stepped
on a little bubble in the ground, and it just swallowed me up,"
Sharp said afterward. Neighbors found Sharp's dog, Bouncer,
running loose with his leash dragging behind. They took the
dog back to Sharp's home, where her daughter was waiting for
her. Realizing that Sharp was missing, they began searching
for her. When they found her in the sinkhole, they called 911.
Fire and rescue personnel came to the scene, but had to
work carefully to rescue Sharp without collapsing the unstable
edges of the sink. When preparations were complete, a rescuer
was lowered into the sinkhole. He placed Sharp in a harness,
and she was lifted from the hole and taken to a hospital for
treatment. She was trapped for about three hours and suffered
back injuries in the incident.
"A Walk to Remember," ABCNews.com, 25 January 2004.


********** 23 February
unspecified cave in Warren County, Kentucky
meth lab found in cave
A group of geology students from Western Kentucky
University made an unusual discovery while surveying a cave
in Warren County. They were mapping the cave as part of a
groundwater study when they found a methamphetamine lab
about 75 feet into the cave. After completing their survey, the
group reported the lab to authorities, providing them with the
cave location and a copy of the map. Investigators examined
the site, and emergency management personnel in protective
suits and respirators removed the chemicals and paraphernalia
from the cave.
Associated Press, "Students Find Meth Lab In Cave," WTVF
NewsChannel 5, Nashville, 24 February 2004.
Comments: The article noted that the investigators were
surprised to find a meth lab in a cave, but a number of similar
incidents have been reported in recent years. Just as caves
were used by moonshiners in decades past, they are now used
for marijuana growing and drug manufacturing. Cavers should
use extreme caution if such a facility is encountered, and
should report it immediately to the proper authorities - the
chemical ingredients and residues involved can be extremely
toxic.


********** 22 March
Wabasha Street Caves, Minnesota
explosives found in old tunnels
Teenagers exploring a group of tunnels known as the
Wabasha Street Caves contacted authorities after they
discovered buried crates containing about 300 pounds of

---------- Page 40 ----------
2004 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
gunpowder about 75 feet inside one of the tunnels. Police
investigated and summoned the bomb squad to remove the
explosives.
The powder was packaged in crates and tubes and had
been buried about two feet deep in a four-foot by five-foot pit.
The crates were in poor condition, and some of the powder
was loose. In the process of removing the gunpowder and
cleaning up the site, investigators found a second and larger
cache buried nearby. The second cache was estimated to
contain between 1,100 and 1,700 pounds of gunpowder.
In the news report, a researcher at the Minnesota State
Historical Society noted that the tunnels had been excavated
long ago and used as "cheap, convenient storage facilities for
everything from beer to cheese." The tunnel where the
gunpowder was found was thought to have been part of a
brewery that closed in the 1950s. There were reportedly no
markings on the crates to indicate the origin of the gunpowder,
but a police spokesman suggested that it appeared to have
come from the U.S. military.
Associated Press, "Roughly 2,000 pounds of gunpowder found
in St. Paul cave," KSTP-TV Channel 5 News, www.kstp.com,
24 March 2004.


********** 26 March
unnamed sea cave on Oahu, Hawaii
fatality, cause unknown
At about 10:00 a.m., a 26-year-old man was pulled,
unconscious, from a sea cave on the Leeward Coast of Oahu.
He was reportedly diving with a companion, who summoned
police to the scene. The unconscious diver could not be
resuscitated.
"Diver found lifeless in sea cave later dies," Honolulu Star-
Bulletin, 28 March 2004.
Comments: No indication was given regarding the cause of the
accident, which apparently occurred during an open-water
dive.


********** 15 April
Sótano de La Garza, Puebla, Mexico
fatality, suicide in pit
Cave rescuers were called to Sótano de La Garza on April
15 to recover the body of a man who had reportedly
committed suicide by throwing himself into a 60-meter deep
pit near Zitlala in Municipio Huitlalpan. After meeting at the
pit with municipal authorities and civil defense personnel, the
cavers rigged and descended the pit. The body was located on
a ledge about 50 meters down. It was packaged in a litter and
brought to the surface.
While they were at the cave, authorities asked the rescuers
to examine the bottom of the pit to investigate a rumor that a
person had been thrown into the pit some 20 years earlier. The
cavers checked the area at the bottom, but found only a few
animal bones and some trash.
Antonio Aguirre Álvarez, "Reporte de Rescate en el Sótano de
La Garza," Espeleo Rescate México, ermexico.tripod.com, 17
April 2004.


********** 26 April
unspecified cave near Oden Ridge, Alabama
lost, overdue
Donnie Burns (39), Kevin Burns (20), and two 13-year old
boys were the subjects of a search in Morgan County,
Alabama, after they failed to return from a caving trip on
Sunday evening. The four had gone to explore a cave near
Oden Ridge off Wilson Mountain Road on Sunday and had
become lost in the cave for several hours before finding their
way back to the surface. Night had fallen, and they decided to
wait in the cave entrance until daylight.
When the four explorers did not come home Sunday
evening, family members called authorities. Fire department
and cave rescue personnel were called out early Monday
morning and had just begun searching for the missing cavers
when they walked out of the woods on their own just before
8:00 a.m. They were unharmed by the experience.
Ronnie Thomas, "Lost hikers found safe after night in ravine,"
The Decatur Daily, 26 April 2004.


********** 27 April
unnamed sea cave on Highway 1, California
car washed into sea cave after accident
Coast Guard and Highway Patrol personnel were
dispatched for a search and rescue effort near the Devil's Slide
area on Highway 1 in San Mateo County after motorists
reported that a vehicle had left the road and plunged over a
cliff into the sea. A rescuer rappelled down the cliff to look for
survivors, and spotted debris near the entrance of a six-foot
wide, 35-foot high sea cave. No survivors were located. The
sea cave could not be entered, but parts of the partially
submerged vehicle were later spotted in the cave. Authorities
were not sure whether the vehicle could be recovered.
"Truck in Ocean Could Be Missing Man's," KRON Bay City
News, www.kron4.com, 27 April 2004.


********** 27 April
Wabasha Street Caves, Minnesota
three fatalities, asphyxiated by carbon monoxide
in tunnel
Shortly before 4:00 p.m. on a Tuesday afternoon, Patrick
Dague (17), Natalie Van Vorst (17), Nicholas Larson (17),
Justin Jensen (17), and Jay Boucher (19) squeezed through the
entrance of a tunnel in the bluff behind the Department of
Agriculture building on Plato Boulevard. The opening is part
of a complex of tunnels known locally as the Wabasha Street
Caves, which were excavated approximately 100 years ago in
a sandstone bluff overlooking the Mississippi River.
As they entered, members of the group noticed the smell of
smoke in the tunnel, but they proceeded anyway. They did not
realize that the tunnel contained dangerous amounts of carbon
monoxide, apparently from a campfire built underground.
Several hundred feet into the tunnel, some members of the
group were overcome by the fumes and collapsed. Boucher
was able to find his way back to the entrance, and called 911
at about 4:00 p.m.

---------- Page 41 ----------
2004 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
Police and rescue units came to the scene, and firefighters
using air packs crawled into the tunnel to search for the
missing young people. They found Jensen a short distance
inside the tunnel, unconscious but still alive, and brought him
out. The other three were not as fortunate - rescuers found
their bodies and brought them to the surface. Jensen was taken
to a hospital where he was successfully treated for carbon
monoxide poisoning. The tunnel entrance was sealed the
following day.
City officials noted that the tunnel complex has long been
known as a hazard, and that previous attempts to seal the
entrances have been thwarted by the soft rock, which makes it
easy for explorers to dig them back open. One news report
quoted St. Paul Deputy Mayor Paul Flaherty, who said people
sometimes go into the tunnels and build campfires. Ventilation
in the tunnels is limited, and the fumes can linger for days. "It
appears that may very well have been what happened last
night," Flaherty said. "The firefighters tested the CO level and
it was lethal."
1. Lonny Goldsmith, "Three students die in St. Paul cave,"
Minnesota Sun, www.mnsun.com, 29 April 2004
2. "Three Dead in Cave, Cave Sealed," KARE Channel 11
News, www.kare11.com, 28 April 2004.
3. Jill Burcum, "Cave survivor's recovery amazes doctors,"
Minneapolis Star Tribune, www.startribune.com, 30 April
2004.
4. Allen Powell II, "Classmates grieve," St. Paul Pioneer
Press, www.twincities.com, 28 April 2004.
Comments: The reports did not indicate the source of the
smoke and carbon monoxide, but suggested that the fumes
resulted from a fire built in the tunnel by previous visitors.
Building a fire of any kind in a confined space such as a cave
or tunnel can be extremely hazardous, as this tragic incident
demonstrates. The tunnel complex is reported to be quite
extensive, with many entrances along the bluff. Several
rescues and deaths have occurred in the tunnels, including a
similar incident in 1992 in which two 17-year-old girls died
from carbon monoxide. A sign outside the tunnel reportedly
warned of the danger of entry.


********** 13 May
sea cave at Panther Beach, California
stranded in sea cave by rising tide
A man was rescued by lifeguards after becoming stranded
in the entrance of a sea cave at Panther Beach. The man, who
was in his 20s, was walking on the beach with a friend, and
the two men ventured into the cave entrance. When they tried
to leave, the rising tide had partially flooded the entrance,
making the passage difficult.
One of the men was able to swim out to some rocks and
climb to the beach, but the other could not get out. His
companion went for help. Two lifeguards were able to enter
the cave and help the stranded man swim out to a waiting
harbor patrol boat. He was then taken back to the beach,
unharmed. There have been several similar incidents at
Panther Beach in recent years.
"Lifeguards rescue man trapped in cave," Santa Cruz
Sentinel, 14 May 2004.


********** 21 June
unspecified cave on Lewis Peak, Utah
stranded on cliff at cave entrance
A 14-year-old boy was hiking with friends on Lewis Peak,
near Ogden, when he decided to climb up a cliff face to reach
what appeared to be a cave entrance. The entrance turned out
to be just an overhang, but the boy soon discovered that he
could not climb back down the cliff. He decided to stay put
while his companions went for help. He was stranded for
several hours before rescuers were able to reach the site and
bring him down safely.
"Ogden Boy Rescued in Cliff Cave," KSL Channel 5 News,
www.ksl.com, 22 June 2004.
Comments: News reports described the overhang as a cave.


********** 28 June
McFails Cave, New York
dog stranded in cave
A five-year-old black Labrador retriever named Mallory
was rescued from a pit entrance of McFail's Cave after a hiker
reported hearing noises coming from the cave. The man had
been riding his motorcycle in the area when he stopped to rest
and walk through the woods where the cave is located. When
he passed near the cave entrance, he heard noises coming from
the hole. The following day, the man called the Schoharie
County sheriff's office and told them that he thought a dog
might be stuck in the cave.
The Sheriff's department sent an officer to investigate and
also called Emily Mobley, the coordinator of the local cave
rescue team. Mobley, Mike Warner, and Deputy Lenny Price
met at the McFail's Cave Preserve property to check out the
cave entrances. At first, they did not hear anything, but when
they checked again, the dog howled and barked. Mobley
called in other members of the cave team, and a rescue was
quickly organized.
The rescuers rigged the 55-foot pit and Joe Armstrong
descended, stopping a few feet off the floor to make sure the
dog was friendly. Once he felt confident that the dog would
not attack him, Armstrong got off rope and checked her
condition. Mallory had suffered a dislocated leg when she fell
into the pit, SO the rescuers contacted a vet, who came to the
scene and provided a sedative and instructions on its use.
Davis descended to administer the sedative and help
Armstrong place the dog in a harness. Mallory was then
hauled out of the pit and taken to the animal hospital for
treatment.
Mallory's owners were surprised the next day when their
lost pet appeared in the news. The dog had been missing for
about two weeks, after pushing through a screen to escape
from the house. Mallory had lost a lot of weight but was
expected to recover. "We are going to be feeding her a lot,"
said her owner.
Patricia Breakey, "Dog rejoins family after cave rescue," The
Daily Star, www.thedailystar.com, 30 June 2004.

---------- Page 42 ----------
2004 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 3 July
Climax Cave, Georgia
stung by wasps at cave entrance
Rodney Clark (26) and Kathryn Gatton (24) climbed down
into the sink at the entrance to Climax Cave at twilight. As
they prepared to enter the cave, they inadvertently stepped on
a yellow jacket nest in the ground just outside the entrance. As
they scrambled to climb out of the confines of the sink and
escape, both cavers were attacked by the wasps and stung
repeatedly. Clark received 52 stings, and Gatton was stung 96
times. They fled the area and went to an emergency room as a
precaution, due to the number of stings.
Rodney Clark, Incident report, 20 January 2005.


********** 10 July
Sotano de Xoconostle, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
fatality, fell into pit while intoxicated
A weekend party turned to tragedy for a group of young
people when a 23-year-old man accidentally stumbled into a
pit and fell to his death. The man had been with friends
attending a rave party near the Cueva de los Caballos, and was
on his way back to his campsite at about 11:00 p.m. when the
accident occurred. It had been raining, and the night was
foggy, but the group had no flashlights or headlamps. One
member of the group was walking a short distance ahead of
his companions, carrying a sack containing several bottles of
beer, when he apparently strayed off the trail and fell into the
entrance of Sotano de Xoconostle, which consists of a 24-
meter initial drop, followed by a steep 6-meter slope, another
drop of 19 meters, and a final drop of 7 meters.
The man's companions heard him stumble, followed by
the sound of the bottles breaking in the pit. They could not see
him, and he did not respond to their calls. They went for help,
and authorities called cave rescuers to the scene. They rigged
the pit, descended, and found the man's body at the bottom.
He had suffered severe head injuries and had been killed by
the fall.
Antonio Aguirre Álvarez, "Reporte Oficial del rescate
efectuado en el Sotano del Xoconostle," Espeleo Rescate
Mexico, ermexico.tripod.com, 11 July 2004.


********** 4 August
unspecified lava tube, Kiholo Bay, Hawaii
fatality, drowned while free-diving in lava tube
Bradford Orwell (28) was reportedly free diving with
friends in "a fresh water pond in an underwater lava tube" at
Kiholo Bay when he failed to surface. A companion searching
for Orwell found him, unconscious but still alive, in about 15
feet of water. Fire and ambulance personnel were called to the
scene, and Orwell was taken to a hospital. Unfortunately, he
had been under water for too long, and died three days later.
"Big Island man dies while free diving," The Honolulu
Advertiser, 6 August 2004.
Comments: It was not clear from the news report whether or
not the men were actually diving in the lava tube. The article
said that Orwell was "pulled from the waters of Kiholo Bay."


********** 23 August
Matacanes Canyon, Nuevo Leon, Mexico
fall, broken ankle on caving/canyoneering trip
Kara Dittmer went to Matacanes Canyon in a group of 16
cavers for a canyoneering trip following the Espeleo Coahuila
conference. The route through the canyon is about 15
kilometers long and passes through two short caves along the
way. Visitors equipped with wetsuits and vertical gear rappel
or jump down a series of waterfalls and swim through plunge
pools during their descent of the canyon, which usually takes
six or seven hours to complete.
Dittmer and her companions had an enjoyable trip for most
of the day, rappelling or jumping into plunge pools as they
followed the stream down the canyon. At about 3:00 p.m.,
Dittmer was climbing down a rock chute at one of the
waterfalls. She reached a point where she thought she could
slide to the pool at the bottom, and let go. As she landed in the
pool, she stuck some submerged rocks and injured her ankle.
Dittmer's companions helped her out of the pool, and
examined her leg. Her ankle was clearly broken, and she could
not walk. They decided that the best course would be to keep
moving down the canyon, sending some members of the group
ahead to get help. While they constructed an emergency litter
from rope and some tree branches, Dittmer's injured leg was
wrapped in padding and duct-taped to her good leg to keep it
stable. When the litter was completed, the cavers began
moving Dittmer down the canyon.
They moved slowly, lowering Dittmer down each drop or
waterfall, and carrying or floating her along the stream. As the
evening approached, they came to the first of two caves on the
route. Dittmer was lowered down a waterfall and into the
upper entrance of the cave, then floated and carried through
the passage and out the lower entrance. As night fell, they
decided to make camp beside the stream and wait for morning
before continuing. They built a fire, and Dittmer tried to rest
as they passed a mostly sleepless night in their wetsuits.
The next morning the cavers resumed their march down
the canyon. About two hours later, they were relieved when a
rescuer coming down the canyon caught up with them,
bringing a Sked litter and the news that a helicopter
evacuation was being arranged. Dittmer was repackaged in the
Sked, and the group continued downstream, heading for an
area large enough to permit access for the helicopter, which
they soon heard overhead.
Once the group had reached a wide enough spot, two
rescuers and a litter were lowered from the helicopter using a
winch. The rescuers placed Dittmer in the litter, clipped in to
the winch cable, and signaled the helicopter, which then lifted
all three from the canyon. After a short flight, they landed
farther down the canyon and loaded Dittmer into the
helicopter for the flight to Monterrey, where she was taken to
a public hospital for treatment.
Unfortunately, Dittmer had no identification, insurance
card, or credit card with her, and her companions had been
detained by authorities investigating the accident. She spent a

---------- Page 43 ----------
2004 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
very uncomfortable afternoon and evening before friends
arrived and arranged a transfer to a private hospital, where she
underwent surgery to repair her broken ankle.
1. Kara Dittmer, "Rescue in Matacanes," The Texas Caver,
December 2004.
2. Terri Whitfield, Fofo Gonzales, and Rob Meyers, "Rescue
in Matacanes!" The Texas Caver, October, 2004.
Comments: The reports noted that another caver in the group,
Becky Jones, also suffered an ankle injury at the same
waterfall where Dittmer broke her leg. Jones' ankle was only
sprained, and she was able to continue with the aid of a
makeshift crutch. In hindsight, it appears that it might have
been wiser to rappel that particular drop, at least for some of
the participants. Dittmer noted that she was not able to see
how the cavers ahead of her negotiated the last part of the
descent.


********** 31 October
unnamed cave near Jochib, Chiapas, Mexico
children reported missing in cave, apparently
drowned
A small cave near the village of Jochib was the scene of an
intense, multi-day rescue effort when a local man reported that
his two sons had become trapped in the cave. Pascual Saraos
Jimenez (11) and his brother Miguel (6) were reportedly
helping their father hunt tepezcuintles (a type of agouti, also
known as a paca) on Sunday evening. The cave has several
entrances, and the boys were supposed to go in through one
entrance and flush the animals out through another, where
their father waited with a machete.
The father managed to wound one of the animals, and
when it retreated into the cave he sent Miguel in after it. When
Miguel did not come out, his father sent Pascual in to look for
him. When time passed and neither of the boys emerged, the
father enlisted other family members and friends to help.
Eventually, they notified authorities and rescuers were called
to the cave. Over the next several days, a massive rescue effort
developed, attracting the attention of the news media, as well
as large number of area residents.
The boys had apparently gone down a small side passage
off the chamber connecting the two entrances. The passage
was low and narrow, and none of the rescuers could fit. Some
rescuers reported that they could hear the boys' voices down
the passage, and efforts focused on enlarging it by digging out
fill material and chiseling rock from the walls. Rescuers also
tried to push or toss food and water down the passage, hoping
that the boys would be able to reach it.
After working for several days, rescuers were able to
penetrate about 20 feet to a 90-degree bend. After that, the
passage became even smaller. A small woman rescuer was
able to squeeze past the constriction and crawl another 15 feet
down the passage, only to be stopped by another sharp bend
and constriction. She retreated from the passage, but reported
that she had been able to hear the children's voices ahead.
The rescue effort was suspended on the fourth day when
heavy rains moved into the area. A stream began flowing into
the cave entrance, and rescuers' worst fears were realized as
the cave began to flood. Despite attempts to redirect the
stream, the water level rose until the entire cave was filled.
The rescuers were forced to abandon the effort. No sign of the
missing boys was ever found.
1. Antonio Aguirre Álvarez, Incident report, 22 November
2004.
2. Manuel de la Cruz, "Mexican rescuers fight against clock
to rescue children trapped in cave," Associated Press, 4
November 2004.
3. "Hope Fades for Saving 2 Boys Stuck in Mexico Cave,"
Reuters, www.reuters.com, 5 November 2004.
4. "Crews abandon search for children trapped in cave,"
Associated Press, 5 November 2004.
Comments: The accounts of this incident were somewhat
contradictory regarding the circumstances of the boys' entry
into the cave. None of the reports mentioned any lights used
by the boys, and it is hard to imagine how or why they would
have pushed and squeezed through the low passage, around
two sharp turns, and through several constrictions to become
stranded, or why they could not crawl toward the rescuers
trying to reach them.
News reports consistently indicated that rescuers were able
to hear the boys and communicate with them at various times
during the first four days of the rescue effort. Hostility from
the local villagers discouraged some rescuers from returning
to the cave after the flood, but during the following week an
effort was made to recover the bodies of the two boys. No
signs of the children were found, and officials concluded that
their bodies had been swept deeper into the cave by the flood
waters.


********** 14 December
unnamed cave near Scottsville, Kentucky
dog stranded in cave
Daniel Spurlock and his dog, Sam, were hunting when
Sam chased a raccoon into a small cave entrance near
Scottsville. When Sam didn't come back out, Spurlock tried to
crawl in to help him, but could not fit through the small
passage. Over the next week, Spurlock returned to the cave
several times, calling Sam and trying to coax him out of the
cave. He could hear Sam whimpering, and the sound of the
dog's cries stayed on his mind.
Spurlock decided he needed some expert help, and began
looking for people who knew something about caves.
Eventually, he made contact with members of the Green River
Grotto at Western Kentucky University. Grotto members went
to the cave and began searching for the stranded canine. They
soon located Sam, who had crawled up into a small passage in
the ceiling. The cavers brought him out of the cave and
returned him to his grateful owner.
Courtney Craig, "Grotto club saves dog, Sam, from tight
spot," Bowling Green Daily News, 23 December 2004.

---------- Page 44 ----------
2005 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 2 February
Waterman Mountain Bat Cave, Arizona
killer bee attack at cave entrance
Tom Gilleland (43), Pete Fine, and Bruce Lynn had
recently learned about this newly discovered cave, SO they
drove about 1.5 hours from Tucson to go visit it. While Lynn
and Fine readied their gear, Gilleland started hiking up the hill
to the cave. The rock in the area is very sharp limestone and
the desert mountain environment is home to a variety of cacti
and sporadic brush. The approach hike is a few hundred yards
long, with about 200 feet of vertical ascent.
As Gilleland crossed a ridge and approached the cave
entrance, a swarm of bees flew out of the entrance and
attacked him. Gilleland suffered numerous stings as he
scrambled back over the ridge and ran down the hill. After
about fifty yards he came to a climb-down at a ledge, where he
was stung again. Gilleland attempted to run down the climb-
down and lost control, tumbling on the sharp rocks and
injuring his left knee, hip, hands, and arms. When he landed,
Gilleland noticed that his right ring finger was dislocated and
sticking out at a 90-degree angle.
While re-setting his finger Gilleland was stung again, SO he
got up and ran another fifty yards until he encountered the
other two cavers coming up the hill. All three continued
quickly down the hill to the car. Lynn, a professional fireman,
rinsed off Gilleland's gashed and bleeding knee and bandaged
it with a clean sock, then drove him to the nearest emergency
room, about an hour away. In addition to the bee stings,
Gillelland's injuries included severe lacerations of his hand
and knee, a broken thumb, two broken fingers, and a variety of
scratches and bruises.
Tom Gilleland, Incident report, 9 March 2005.
Comments: Gilleland writes: "This cave was known to a few
other cavers to contain killer bees, but due to the Arizona cave
secrecy ethic of some cavers, this information was not made
available. Sometimes cave secrecy has serious safety
consequences."


********** 14 April
abandoned limestone mine, Kansas
lost, inadequate equipment
At about midnight on Thursday evening, seven young
people entered an abandoned limestone mine at South 34th
Street and Steele Road. They built a campfire and spent some
time "hanging out" before five members of the group decided
to use a boat to explore the flooded tunnels. They soon
became lost in the mine. Matters went from bad to worse
when their boat began to leak, and their flashlight batteries
began to die.
Eventually, the explorers found a place where they could
cling to one of the pillars in the mine tunnels, SO they decided
to stay put and wait for help. They huddled together, talking
and singing to pass the time, and praying for rescue.
When the explorers failed to return, the remaining
members of the group left the mine to get help. Rescuers soon
arrived and began searching the mine. The lost explorers were
finally saved when they saw a light and were able to find their
way to the entrance. They had been in the mine for 14 hours.
Peggy Breit, "Cave Party Turns Into Nightmare For
Friends," www.The KansasCityChannel.com 15 April 2005.
Comments: The news report first referred to the mine as a
cave, but then described it as an abandoned limestone mine.


********** 18 May
Stephens Gap Cave, Alabama
caver fall outside cave
Toni Amundson was injured during a Huntsville Grotto
trip to Stephens Gap when she slipped and fell just outside the
cave. The cavers had rigged a rope in the Keyhole entrance as
well as in the main pit, and Amundson was walking up to the
Keyhole when she lost her footing. She tried to control her
fall, but landed awkwardly with her leg underneath her,
breaking her ankle. Members of the group helped her get back
to the parking area, and she was taken to an emergency room.
Dan Mattle, "May's Grotto Trip to Stephens Gap,' Huntsville
Grotto Newsletter, v47n7, July 2005.


********** 29 May
Albertson's Quarry, Vermont
fatality, drowned while diving in mine
Tim Gagnon (43) and John Weymouth entered the flooded
opening of Albertson's Quarry at about 10:00 a.m. The mine
is a popular dive site, and both men had dived there many
times before. They were equipped with standard cave-diving
gear.
The divers followed the main guideline to its end, where
they attached a jump reel and transferred to another line
leading deeper into the mine. They did not go far, however,
before turning the dive and starting back toward the entrance.
As they made their way out, Weymouth's regulator failed, and
began to free-flow. Gagnon passed the long hose of his rig to
Weymouth and the two shared Gagnon's air as they continued,
with Weymouth in front and Gagnon right behind him. About
400 feet from the entrance, Weymouth was surprised when the
long hose was suddenly pulled away from him. Weymouth
used his leaking regulator and kept going. He surfaced in the
entrance with less than 500 psi left in his tanks. There was no
sign of Gagnon.
Weymouth left the water and called for help. Rescue
divers were called to the scene, where they spent the rest of
the day searching for Gagnon without success. The following
day, recovery divers entered the mine and found Gagnon's
body on the floor of the mine tunnel about 400 feet inside the
mine at a depth of 109 feet. One of his tanks still contained
about 2,000 psi of air, but the valve was closed. Investigators

---------- Page 45 ----------
2005 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
theorized that Gagnon may have been bumping against the
tunnel ceiling during their exit, accidentally closing the valve.
1. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 2 June, 2005.
2. Alan J, Keays, "Diver drowns in quarry," Rutland Herald,
31 May 2005.
3. Darren Perron, "Crews Dive for Body in West Rutland,"
WCAX Channel 3 News, www.wcax.com, 30 May 2005.
Comments: Gagnon was reported to be full-cave certified.


********** 18 August
Sótano de la Cochera, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
fatality, fell into pit
A man searching for a lost horse alerted authorities after
spotting what turned out to be the body of a man in Sotano de
la Cochera. Cave rescue groups were called to the scene to
recover the body from the 35-meter deep pit. The victim was a
man, approximately 40 to 45 years of age, who had apparently
fallen into the pit and died of injuries from the fall. He had
been dead for about 24 hours before being discovered. The
man had no ropes or equipment. The reason for his fall was
unknown.
Antonio Aguirre Álvarez, "Reporte de Rescate en el Sótano de
La Cochera," Espeleo Rescate Mexico, ermexico.tripod.com,
19 August 2005.


********** 18 August
Gollums Cave, Utah
four fatalities, drowned in abandoned mine
At about 3:00 a.m. on Thursday morning, Blake Donner
(24), Jennifer Galbraith (21), Scott McDonald (28), Ariel
Singer (18), and Joseph Ferguson (26) crawled through the
low entrance of an abandoned mine on Y Mountain, near
Provo. The mine, which is known locally as Gollums Cave, is
an excavated spring. A small stream flows out of the entrance,
and there is a pool just inside. Beyond the pool, a low tunnel
leads about 50 feet to a fork. On the right, a tunnel runs for
about 200 feet and ends. The left fork runs about 70 feet and
intersects a flooded, lower level tunnel before ending.
The flooded passage, which is about four feet high and two
feet wide, begins as a two-foot diameter pool in the floor of
the main tunnel and runs underwater for about 15 feet before
opening into an 11-foot long, six-foot high chamber. Previous
explorers had rigged a rope through the tunnel SO that they
could hold their breath and pull themselves through the
underwater passage to reach the chamber. Candle remnants
and markings in the room indicated frequent visitation.
The group had come to the mine intending to go to the
chamber beyond the sump. They were dressed in shorts and T-
shirts, and carried flashlights and candles for light. When they
reached the flooded passage, Donner, Galbraith, McDonald,
and Singer decided to go through the sump to see the final
chamber. Ferguson, however, decided not to go. He stayed by
the pool at the beginning of the sump as the other four
submerged, one after the other, and pulled themselves through
to the room beyond. After the last of his friends went through
the sump, Ferguson felt a tug on the rope, which he interpreted
as a signal that they had all reached the room.
Ferguson waited for his friends to come back through the
sump. He did not expect them to be gone very long. When
they had still not emerged after 45 minutes, he became
worried. Ferguson left the tunnel and called friends who had
explored the mine and been to the chamber. They told him that
45 minutes should have been more than enough time. When he
could still find no sign of his friends, Ferguson called 911.
Police, fire, and search and rescue personnel responded,
and were soon gathered at the mine entrance. Special teams
trained in confined space rescue and underwater rescue were
also called to the scene. At about 9:45 a.m., the body of one of
the women was located in the flooded tunnel. Behind her,
rescuers found the bodies of her companions. All four had
drowned in the flooded tunnel, apparently while trying to
make their exit.
1. Michael Rigert, "Four die in cave," Provo Daily Herald,
19 August 2005.
2. N. Nokkentved, "Cave or mine? Either way, it pays to be
safe," Provo Daily Herald, 19 August 2005.
3. Mark Eddington and Todd Hollingshead, "Daredevil cave
trip ends in tragedy," Salt Lake Tribune, 19 August 2005.
4. Sara Israelsen and Jeremy Twitchell, "4 drown in cave,"
Deseret News, 19 August 2005.
5. "Four Hikers Found Dead Inside Provo Cave," KSL
News, www.ksl.com, 19 August 2005.
6. Kevin Dickerson, Dave Bennett, and Shay Lelegren,
"Gollum's Cave (Water Mine)," Survey and map, 18
August 2005.
Comments: Holding your breath and swimming or crawling
through a sumped passage is extremely dangerous and unsafe.
Apparently, however, the practice was apparently well-known
among young people in the area. News reports included
statements from several people who had been to the chamber
on previous occasions, describing it as a popular stunt for area
residents.
News reports referred to the mine as "the Cave of Death"
or "Gollums Cave," but local cavers involved in the response
report that the so-called cave is actually a man-made tunnel
excavated to enlarge a spring. Such features are sometimes
referred to as "water mines." There was some debate as to
whether the flooded passage and chamber were natural or
man-made. The mine is located on city property, and was
permanently sealed after the incident.


********** 18 September
sea cave at Black Rock, Kaanapali, Hawaii
fatality, drowned while snorkeling
The body of a 53-year-old woman was recovered from an
underwater cave just off shore at the popular Black Rock
diving area on Kaanapali Beach. The woman had apparently
drowned after becoming wedged in the cave while snorkeling.
"Visitor's body removed from underwater cave," Maui News,
19 September 2005.

---------- Page 46 ----------
2005 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 17 October
unspecified cave near Peak's Corner, Alabama
meth lab found in cave
Police were called to the entrance of a cave at Peak's
Corner, near Fyffe, when a man searching for arrowheads
looked into a cave and discovered an active methamphetamine
operation inside. Investigators examined the site, and then
removed the chemicals and equipment.
"We have worked several calls since October 1 about
abandoned meth labs, but I think this is the first one we have
ever worked where it was found in a cave," said Task Force
Commander Darrel Collins. "There was a time when we found
several marijuana plants growing inside caves in the county,
but this is the first active meth lab I can remember."
Agents had to make several trips on four-wheelers to carry
away all the materials found in the cave.
Kelly Townsend, "Officials find lab in a cave," Fort Payne
Times-Journal, 19 October 2005.


********** 14 November
Panther Cave, Tennessee
dog stranded in pit
A hunting dog named Buck was rescued from Panther
Cave just outside Great Smoky Mountains National Park after
hikers heard the sound of barking coming from a hole in the
ground near their campsite. When they looked into the hole
and spotted the dog, Buck was perched on a ledge about 40
feet below the surface. The hikers reported the situation to
park personnel that evening, and on the following morning
four rangers went to the cave. During the night the dog had
climbed or fallen down from the ledge, and was now on the
bottom of the pit, about 70 feet below the surface.
Park Ranger Rick Brown rappelled to the bottom of the
cave to rescue Buck, tying a makeshift harness around the dog
SO that he could be lifted from the pit. Buck was hungry and
dehydrated, but he had no serious injuries and was expected to
recover. He was taken to a vet for treatment.
Buck was wearing a hunting collar with his owner's name
and telephone number, as well as a tracking device. Park
officials were able to contact the owner to let him know that
the dog had been found. The owner reported that Buck had
disappeared during a hunt 16 days earlier. He had searched the
area extensively for days after the disappearance, but had not
been able to find Buck. Apparently, the dog had been in the
pit the entire time, and the radio tracking signal had been
blocked as a result.
Buck's owner was delighted to have him back, "I was
really glad to get the news," he said, noting that Buck is "one
fine coon dog."
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
1. Thomas Fraser, "Hunting dog found in cave after 16
days," Maryville Daily Times, 17 November 2005.
2. Morgan Simmons, "Dog tired but OK after rescue,"
KnoxNews.com, 17 November 2005.


********** 14 December
Cato Cave, Tennessee
marijuana farm found in cave
Police in Trousdale County arrested three men after
discovering an extensive marijuana growing operation in a
cave underneath a house in Dixon Springs. In the cellar of the
stylish A-frame house, investigators found a steel door leading
down into a series of rooms equipped with elaborate lighting
and watering systems supporting more than 1,000 marijuana
plants.
The house had been constructed on top of a cave, which
had then been enlarged and modified to support the
clandestine farm. The men had also constructed a hidden
escape route from the back of the cave, installing a ladder to
the surface and covering the opening with a hatch made to
look like a boulder.
Authorities were alerted when electric company workers
discovered that the drug farmers had tapped into nearby power
lines to steal electricity for the operation. The men later
pleaded guilty to charges including growing marijuana and
theft of electric power. The house, which was seized by the
state, was later destroyed in a fire.
1. Leon Alligood, "Suspect in cave pot farm hid his true
identity, Nashville Tennessean, 7 January 2006
2. "Drug Cave Case Goes To Grand Jury," WTVF
NewsChannel 5, www.newschannel5.com, 21 February
2006.


********** 21 October
unnamed lava tube on Kilauela, Hawaii
fell into lave tube entrance
Shortly after 10:00 p.m. on a Friday evening, park rangers
and firefighters responded to a report that a person had fallen
into a lava hole about 25 or 30 feet deep on the Kilauea
Military Camp grounds. The 19-year-old woman was able to
speak to rangers, who rappelled down to assess her condition.
Firefighters and a ranger then brought her back to the surface,
where she complained of left ankle pain. She was taken to a
hospital for treatment. The woman had gone over a barrier to
relieve herself, where she fell into the hole.
"Woman falls into lava tube during bathroom break," West
Hawaii Today, 23 October 2005.

---------- Page 47 ----------
The National Cave Rescue Commission
The National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) is a
volunteer group developed to train cave rescue personnel
throughout the United States. It is part of the NSS, located
within the Department of the Administrative Vice-President.
The NCRC does not perform cave rescues. It organizes,
develops, and provides training in cave rescue techniques,
maintains lists of individuals trained in cave rescue, and can
help locate rescue resources in times of need. Most NCRC-
trained cavers do participate in rescues, but not as part of the
NCRC. They work as members of their local rescue teams,
civil defense units, or cave rescue groups.
The NCRC also works to:
Maintain good working relationships with other rescue-
oriented individuals, organizations, government
agencies, and sources of specialized equipment and
services (e.g., the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center
and the Center for Mine Safety and Health
Administration).
Maintain current files of potentially useful equipment
(e.g., underground communications equipment and cave-
oriented medical kits) and services that can be obtained
through the above sources.
Acquire and maintain a limited supply of certain
equipment, such as special rescue litters and vertical
rescue gear, in key locations throughout the country.
Increase the number and proficiency of cave rescuers
across the United States by sponsoring training sessions
and seminars, and by encouraging other caving, rescue,
and EMS organizations to sponsor such educational
programs.
Encourage international cooperation by developing
contacts with cave rescuers and rescue agencies in other
countries, by pre-planning with these groups where US
involvement is anticipated, and by inviting participation
of cave rescuers from other countries in NCRC seminars.
Organization
The NCRC is led by a Board of Regional Coordinators.
The Board includes a National Coordinator, Training
Coordinator, Medical Coordinator, and Diving Coordinator
(each of whom coordinates resources and activities at a
national level), and Regional Coordinators for each of ten
regions in the United States and its territories. Board members
National Cave Rescue Commission Course Listings and Contact Information:
www.ncrc.info
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
are nominated by cavers and cave rescue personnel, and are
appointed by the NSS Board of Governors. The NCRC
depends on many volunteers without official positions whose
special knowledge, talents, or contacts make the network more
effective.
Training
The NCRC sponsors a week-long Cave Rescue Operations
and Management Seminar each year that is held in various
locations around the United States. The seminar serves as a
"boot camp" of cave rescue and provides three levels of
training. Cave rescue is constantly evolving, and the most up-
to-date techniques are presented each year. In addition to the
annual national week-long seminar, the NCRC regions
sponsor regional week-long seminars, regional modular
seminars (taught over a series of weekends), courses in small-
group and self-rescue techniques, and weekend cave rescue
orientation courses.
NCRC seminars consist of extensive classroom and field
work designed to maximize the learning experience. The
seminars include lectures, demonstrations, and field exercises
on underground environments, vertical rescue, mechanical
advantage systems, extrication techniques, basic medical
principles, communications, and management of cave rescue
operations. Emphasis is placed on practical skills and
techniques, with realistic exercises in a variety of cave
environments.
The seminars provide basic and advanced material for
students who typically include cavers, emergency services
personnel, and emergency managers. During the eight days of
a seminar, students receive about 100 hours of instruction, and
are on the move from early morning well into the evening.
The NCRC uses and teaches the Incident Command System
(ICS) used by fire departments, rescue squads, and other
emergency agencies and services.
Course Listings and Contact Information
Information on NCRC operation, activities, and training,
including contact information for NCRC Coordinators, is
published each year in the NSS Members Manual, and is also
available on the NCRC web site at www.ncrc.info. Upcoming
seminars are announced on the web site and in the NSS News.
