
---------- Page 1 ----------
DECEMBER 1988-Part II
American
Caving

---------- Page 2 ----------
December 1988
Volume 46, Number 12
published monthly by The National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, AL 35810. Subscription rate is $15 per year. When changing an
address, give old address as well as new. Second-class postage paid at
Huntsville, AL and additional mailing offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the National Speleological Society,
Inc., Cave Avenue, Huntsville, AL 35810.
Copyright 1988
All rights reserved. No portion of this manual may be
reproduced without written permission of the National
Speleological Society.
The National Speleological Society
American Caving Accidents
GETTING THE EDGE
by Steve Knutson
Cave exploration is a hazardous activity. No one can argue against
this-there are obviously many potential dangers waiting for you in a
cave. But how dangerous is it? How likely are we to be involved in an
accident?
In caving there are some 60 reported incidents per year in North
America. Let us for a moment assume that there are 3000 "active"
cavers, taking, say, 20 cave trips per year involving 10 hours in the
cave per trip. Thus there are only 60 incidents per year per 600,000
caver-hours, or one incident per 10,000 caver-hours. If an "active"
caver's career (some "cavers'' have no career) is ten years, that
equates to 2,000 hours of caving. We can readily see that, statistically
speaking, only one caver in five would have an accident in the course of
his career.
However this sounds to you, whether you consider this to be safe or
dangerous, is irrelevant, in my opinion. Statistics can usually be
finessed to say whatever we want. The real question here is who is to be
that one caver in five? and why do some cavers have more than one
incident? Why does an accident occur to one caver and not to another in
the same party?
If we make the decision to go caving, we will find that some accidents
are truly an act of Nature or fate - they are not predictable. This could
include encountering bad air, a storm not in the forecast, illness, some
equipment failures, some rockfall, failure of a tested handhold, etc. Yet
other accidents are the obvious consequence of decisions we have
made: to go in a water cave in bad weather, not to replace gear that
shows wear, to continue into unstable rock, to climb an exposed pitch
when a belay is not available, and on.
The question then becomes, what causes us to make poor (risky)
decisions? And most important, can we manipulate any of these causes
and affect our own fate?
1) Body Chemistry. Studies have shown that sensation seekers tend
to have higher levels of sex hormones, particularly testosterone. They
have also been shown to have lower levels of mono amine oxidase, an
STAFF
Editor
Steve Knutson
Production
Mike & Lynne Sims
Advertising Manager
Scott Fee
Cover
The Fishure Series, Sotano San Augustin, Oaxaca,
Mexico by Ron Simmons © 1988
Back Cover
Canadian Hole, West Virginia by Ron Simmons
© 1988
enzyme regulating brain activity. We probably shouldn't manipulate
body chemistry, but recognizing a sensation seeker can at least allow
one to avoid that person. The knowledge that body chemistry is a factor
may also allow us to realize that our own urge to do something risky may
have no rational basis.
2) Perception of Risk. In a study done at the University of California at
San Francisco, teenagers tended to see the risk of drug addiction and
unplanned pregnancy as becoming less likely with the repetition of the
act over time. This is the same as getting "heads" several times in a
row when you flip a coin and believing that the chances of getting
"tails" is thus decreasing. In risk taking, it is the same as believing
that successfully climbing without a belay once makes it safer the next
time. This is false.
3) Peer Pressure. To be accepted, to be part of a group or a society is
a strong urge and this alone will sometimes dictate what we will do and
how we will do it. Thus a person will attempt something extremely risky
rather than face social or group rejection. We should try neither to exert
nor to yield to peer pressure in making decisions on safety, but it will be
there nonetheless. Keep it in mind.
4) The Leader-Follower Syndrome. Leadership is not just something
assigned or named. In any group, even ones that profess to be without a
leader, someone will lead; others will then follow. The roles are not
necessarily fixed, they can be assumed or played by some as required.
Even if one is fixed in a role, knowing the liabilities of that role will
enable him to perhaps evaluate situations.
The leader has the great advantage that he is more aware. He is more
aware because he is going first, both choosing the way and trying
difficult moves first. Note that if one caver is leading and another tries a
difficulty first, then at that moment their roles have reversed-
remember that we are talking about assumed roles, not assigned roles.
The leader's big disadvantage is that if there is some hazard hiding
along the way, he will encounter it first. A loose rock, badly rigged rope,
crumbly holds, etc.
The follower has the opposite advantages and disadvantages. In
following others, he will be less aware of what is going on. The pace will
not be his and he is not required to find the way or make choices-his
mind is free to drift. He is not likely to test holds and rigging like the
leader would, or should. Some hazard the leader notices, and avoids,
may not be noticed by the followers if the leader does not point it out.

---------- Page 3 ----------
Similarly, the follower will not have to try difficulties first-ideally he
can watch those ahead of him do something tricky and learn.
Yet, if the leader (usually a person of greater ability) makes a difficult
move, he may know exactly what he is doing and be quite safe whereas
the follower may not have any idea whether he is capable of this and will
do it just because he is expected to follow.
This is a complex concept but understanding it will be beneficial when
it comes to making safety decisions.
5) Pity the Poor Novice. In the late 60's I was involved in mountain
rescue in Oregon. One Monday morning in March we were called out to
search for a party of six lost on Saturday in a storm on Mt. Hood. We
found them when the storm broke, shortly after dawn. They had no food
or dry clothes with them when trapped and were in bad shape,
immobile, with dangerously lowered body temperatures. They all would
have died soon, but one was already dead, having died Sunday night.
He was the novice of the group.
The novice in caving is in a similar position. He will be anxious when
experienced people are at ease; he will not have the right equipment, the
proper clothes; he will expend more energy making the myriad body
movements necessary in caving. He will be most likely to make a
mistake. All other things being equal, he will be the most likely to
succumb to hypothermia, as in the mountaineering situation I observed.
Keep this in mind when you take a novice caving and when you
yourself are the novice-when you do your first sump dive, cave SCUBA
dive, vertical caving, cave climbing, or alpine caving.
6) The Macho Mystique. Caving is a physical activity and it is
wonderful to revel in our exertions, in the overcoming of obstacles, in
success in a difficult environment to survive, to conquer, and not to
yield.
Yet as in any physical activity you will encounter people who are not
satisfied with reaching a goal or completing a job. They want to show
how good they are-especially in comparison to someone else. Thus a
companion may come under pressure to show that he is not inferior, and
do something not because he thinks he can do it, but because he feels
compelled to do it. Amongst males we would say that his "manhood" is
in question.
Every person has limitations and should only be expected to perform
within them. Beware of macho cavers, they may be your undoing.
Perhaps it would help to hold in mind that a caver's exploration
doesn't convey greatness on the caver-he just happens to be there.
What his exploration reveals is the greatness of the cave.
7) The Solo Caver The common concept is that solo caving is
exceedingly dangerous and foolhardy. Yet solo caving has always been
with us and there are very few instances of solo cavers in trouble.
Indeed, on the face of the evidence, cave diving is much more foolhardy.
There are two types of solo cavers. One is the caver who operates
independently from companions in the same cave or area. His
companions are aware of his "solo" efforts and will send help if
needed. The other is the true solo caver, who tells no one of his
intentions and is thus entirely on his own, truly solo.
Is it really more dangerous than group caving? Except for the
possibility of the loss of light, the same hazards are present as in party
caving. But most important, just as the leader should be more aware
than the follower, the solo caver should be more aware than the normal
leader. He cannot allow himself the luxury of complacency that comes on
us in group caving.
In a different vein, there are accidents that occur because you are in a
group-rocks dislodged by a caver strike a companion, a leader makes
a poor decision for a group, or one caver does a poor job of rigging a
rope, as examples.
Thus, within the context of greater awareness, the solo caver is safer
than the same caver in a group.
The problem comes when something does happen-(the act of
"Fate"). So many incidents are solved by help from the potential
victim's companions. But this is a question of rescue, not of caver
safety.
Note that followers in caving do benefit from group caving-they are
shown the way, what holds to use, the rope may be rigged better than
they could do it, etc. But a true follower is incapable of solo caving.
476 NSS News: December 1988
Since there are more followers than leaders in this world, it is thus
unlikely that solo caving will be widely practiced.
Awareness. Just as a mugger on the street will pick as potential
victims those that seem to be unaware, so accidents will come to the
unaware caver. Pay no attention to loose rocks, the solidity of holds, the
footing at the edge of a pit, or the weather when you go water caving,
and you are setting yourself up.
But can we control awareness, or are we limited to what we are born
with? Training in defensive driving is nothing more than training yourself
to be more aware of what other drivers are doing and compensating for
it. The same can be done in caving.
Indeed, in this noisy, complicated world many people train
themselves to be unaware. You see it every day-th woman with the
screaming infant who seems not to hear; people walking down the street
who look neither right nor left and would walk right into us if we didn't
step aside. They shut themselves off from irritations but also from
warnings of potential hazards.
Obviously, our awareness is also affected by environmental factors on
a day-to-day basis-our state of physical and mental health, diet, proper
sleep, and SO on.
The changing of awareness may be automatic. I have noticed a
marked increase in my own alertness in going from traveling in the
middle of a group, to leading the group, to going solo. I didn't intend the
changes but on reflection they were obvious. This is especially true of
solo caving. It is hard to believe how aware you can be until you try it.
CONCLUSION:
Accidents are of two types-predictable and unpredictable. Decisions
affect the occurrence of predictable accidents. A number of factors
affect our decisions; most of these are reflections of our attitudes. Some
potentially controllable ones are as follows:
1) Do we perceive risks properly?
2) Do we exert or allow ourselves to be affected by peer pressure?
3) Are we a leader or a follower?
4) Are we a novice?
5) Are we macho or allow ourselves to be affected by macho
behavior?
6) Are we as aware as possible?
So try to see risks in proper perspective, don't express or yield to
peer pressure or macho behavior, and try to combine the awareness of a
solo caver with the security of thoughtful companions, and with some
luck in Fate, you'll go through your caving career safely.
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS - 1987
We have again used the same classification scheme for incidents:
1. Result of Incident (non-Scuba)
AA Fatality (body evacuation)
A Injury with evacuation or aid necessary
B Evacuation or aid necessary-no injury
C Injury-no evacuation or aid
D No injury-no evacuation or aid
Total
Total AA, A, B, C
2. Cause of Incident
a acetylene explosion
b bad air
C caver fall
d drowning
e equipment failure or lack
f flood
h hypothermia

---------- Page 4 ----------
i illness
I losing the way
r rockfall
S stuck caver
X exhaustion


********** 0 other
3. Scuba
SCUBA incidents are again in a separate category. There are 7 incidents
reported here, including 2 without a fatality.
In ordinary caving the year was very similar to 1986 as can be seen in
the categorical breakdown. There were three incidents of fatality, involving
four deaths. Two were killed trying to ascend a shaft with a waterfall in
flood (2-28), one drowned while diving a sump with a snorkle (12-20),
and one caver fell from the end of a rope too short for the pit while
descending hand-over-hand (12-26).
The cause of incidents experienced a shift from 1986 with three
categories comprising the majority of incidents; the third category in 1986
jumping to first in 1987. The categories are rockfall (16), caver fall (15),
and equipment failure (13).
1. Rockfall
These were largely caused by cavers climbing on loose rock (4-4,
5-24-A, 10-10), rigging a rope or cable ladder so that rock is dislodged
while climbing (1-5, Winter 86/87-A, 2-13, 5-2, 5-6, 7-18, 7-19, 9-8) or
by dislodging a rock while free climbing on apparently solid rock (1-4,
5-23). A couple (or more) may have been spontaneous (Aug.-A, Winter
86/76-C). The effects ranged from fright and damaged equipment to
injuries as serious as a broken leg (1-4). The latter required an evacuation
from deep in Ellison's Cave, probably the most technical rescue yet
undertaken in the United States. A rock shifting, pinning a caver's hand
resulted in the loss of parts of two fingers (Aug.-A). Another caver was
temporarily trapped when a boulder he sat on rolled over onto him.
2. Caver Fall
Most of these were short falls in situations where a belay would not
normally be used (1-3, Jan., 3-7, 5-16, 5-30, Summer-C, 7-17, 7-18-C,
Fall-B, 12-12). One certainly should have been belayed (8-1) and one was
belayed, resulting in a lesser injury (4-11). Shoulder dislocation (7-18-B)
and a broken leg (Fall-B) seem to be the most serious injuries. Please note
that last year I included out of control rappels in this category although
they are due to misuse of equipment and should have been in that
category.
3. Equipment Failure or Lack
This interesting category includes three instances of being unable to
climb a rope hand-over-hand, one knotted (1-10), one tied to a grappling
hook (Feb.), and one, a fatality, in descending a pit (12-26). There were
poor lights (7-30), a broken rope ladder (7-28), hair caught in a rack
(1-1), too little friction with a rack (June), broken webbing on a foot Gibbs
in a 400 foot pit (2-15), a problem with a climbing pole (4-19), a handline
slipping off a boulder (10-17), a broken "cable" being used to lower
someone down a pit (Winter 87/88), and a fall while trying to use an etrier
(aider) for down-climbing. There were also two non-fatal SCUBA incidents
where equipment was the problem.
The lost way reports had three incidents resulting from attempted
cross-over trips (8-13, 11-7, and 11-15-A) and one where rescuers got
lost while searching for lost cavers (11-8).
Other categories include bad air (Summer-B, Fall-A), drowning (a sump
dive, 12-20; and ascending in a waterfall, 2-28), hypothermia resulting in
an evacuation (5-23) and a death while ascending (2-28), stuck caver
produced a need for aid when one couldn't negotiate a narrow canyon
(5-24), and exhaustion when a caver couldn't climb a cable ladder
(Aug.-B).
The other category had reports of carbide burns (Summer-A), animal
traps in a cave (Winter 86/87-D), and a walking "fatality" who was
talked out of continuing (11-15-B).
In past years, Mike Dyas has been a big help to the production of ACA
by forwarding accident references he found in the course of doing the
"Dyas Digest'' for the NSS News. I certainly appreciated this and hope
that this service can be carried on by Ray Hardcastle. It would help greatly
if newsletter editors could spot accidents or incidents in their own
publications and make a point to send me a copy. Some
do
already-Thanks.
Send all info to:
American Caving Accidents
Steve Knutson, Editor
505 Roosevelt Street
Oregon City, OR 97045
I would like to receive photos to use on the ACA cover-if you have a
good, dangerous-looking action shot, send me a good dupe. I also want to
include a few pictures of rescues in progress-have any?
CAVING INCIDENT REPORTS-1987
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED
CODE-CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
Ac-Pettijohn Cave
Georgia
2-26-86
Cs-Arritt Mill Tunnel Cave
Virginia
7-28-86
1987 Incidents
CODE-CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
Be-Sawmill Well
Tennessee
1-1
Cc-Cueva del Borrego
Mexico
1-3
Ar-Ellison's Cave
Georgia
1-4
Cr-Ellison's Cave
Georgia
1-5
Be-Rocky Hollow Cave
Virginia
1-10
Cc--Coldwater Cave
lowa
January
Dr-Canyon Cavern
Colorado
Winter 86/87-A
Do-Beartrap Cave
Utah
Winter 86/87-B
Dr-Massanutten Caverns
Virginia
Winter 86/87-C
Ao-Wolff Cave
Alabama
Winter 86/87-D
De-Coldwater Cave
lowa
February
Ar-Canoe Creek Mine Cave
Pennsylvania
2-13
De-Fern Cave
Alabama
2-15
Bf-Fisher Cave
Tennessee
2-28A
AAfdh-Miller Cave
lowa
2-28B
Bc-Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
3-7
Dr-Virgin Cave
New Mexico
4-4
Cc-Grindstaff Cave
Tennessee
4-11
De-Mystery Cave
Missouri
4-19
Ar-Fisher Ridge Cave
Kentucky
5-2
Cr-Thunder Dome Cave
Tennessee
5-6
Ac-Stinging Nettle Cave
Tennessee
5-16
Bh-Lowe's Cave
Virginia
5-23A
Ar-Luddington's Cave
W. Virginia
5-23B
Br-Un-named Cave
California
5-24A
Dr-Lowe's Cave
Virginia
5-24B
As-Butler Cave
Virginia
5-24C
Cc-Elm Tree Cave
Kansas
5-30
Ce-Natural Trap Cave
Wyoming
June
Cc-Cristal Caverns
New Mexico
7-17
Dr-Pink Panther Cave
New Mexico
7-18A
Ae-McFail's Cave
New York
7-18B
Ac-Crowbar Cave
New Mexico
7-18C
Cc-Millerton Lakes Cave
California
7-18D
Ar-Unspecified Cave
Virginia
7-19
Ae-House Springs Cave
Missouri
7-28

---------- Page 5 ----------
Be-Alabaster Caverns
Oklahoma
7-30
Co-Doghill-Donahue Cave
Indiana
Summer-A
Db-Un-named Cave
California
Summer-B
Cc-Tongue River Cave
Wyoming
Summer-C
Ac-Coon Cave
Indiana
8-1
BI-Bowden Cave
W. Virginia
8-13
Cr-Coley Cave
Kentucky
August-A
Bx-Gargantua Cave
Canada
August-B
Ar-Un-named Pit
W. Virginia
9-8
Db-Honey Creek Cave
Texas
Fall-A
Ac-Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
Fall-B
Cr-Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
10-10
Ce-Neff's Canyon Cave
Utah
10-17
BI-Sloan's Valley System
Kentucky
11-7
DI-Sloan's Valley System
Kentucky
11-8
BI-Clarksville Cave
New York
11-15A
Do-Clarksville Cave
New York
11-15B
Be-Ashcamp Cave
Kentucky
Winter 87/88
Ac-Widow Cave
Oklahoma
12-12
AAd-Waikapala'e Wet Cave
Hawaii
12-20
AAec-Copperhead Pit
Indiana
12-26
SCUBA:
Previously Unreported
CODE-CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
Be-Orange Grove Sink
Florida
12-7-85
1987 Incidents
CODE-CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
AA-Unspecified Cave
Mexico
Spring
De-Castleguard Cave
Canada
4-7
AA-Bonnet Spring
Florida
6-13
AA-The Elevator Shaft
Hawaii
7-13
AA-Jenkins Creek Cave
Florida
7-21
AA-Blue Spring
Florida
9-28
De-Wild Well
lowa
11-15
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED
A-caver fall


********** February 26, 1986
Pettyjohn Cave, Georgia
On February 26, four cavers were exploring in Pettyjohn Cave, Walker
County, Georgia. At 7:15 p.m., Wilson Mann (19) was climbing a chimney
when he slipped and fell about 35 feet. The initial diagnosis was a possible
broken back; his companions went for help.
The Walker County Rescue squad was notified and at about 10 p.m.
called Dogwood City Grotto Cave Rescue and over 30 cavers responded.
Mann was placed in a litter and lifted up the chimney. He was highlined
across two steep breakdown slopes and exited the cave at 1:15 am (the
27th). At a hospital he was found to have contusions but no major injuries.
Reference: K.W. Huffines "Rescue Brief's" Georgia Underground
(Dogwood City Grotto), December 1986, p 23.
Analysis: As I have said many times, if you can't take a fall without
obvious risk of injury, you should be using a belay.
478 NSS News: December 1988
C-stuck caver


********** September 28, 1986
Arritt Mill Tunnel Cave, Virginia
On September 28, five cavers entered the Arritt Mill Tunnel and the
cave opening off it, in Alleghany County, Virginia. They intended to survey
and do some photography, so they split up with three starting a survey of
west-trending leads off the main passage. A low slit, trending upward,
allowed only two of the three to pass and soon became too tight for even
the smallest of the surveyors. Tom Spina, one of the two remaining,
backed out feet first, apparently having some difficulty. He presumably
was aware of a problem and left the cave "in a fair amount of discomfort."
He had suffered two cracked ribs exiting the squeezeway. (Tom Spina,
Personal Communication August 1988).
1987 CAVING INCIDENTS
B-equipment failure


********** January 1, 1987
Sawmill Well, Tennessee
On January 1, four cavers went to Sawmill Cave in Marion County,
Tennessee. The well is a "nice 155 foot pit with several waterfalls. The
first is right at the top and falls harmlessly down the center. A second is
encountered about 50 feet from the floor.' This falls 20 feet to a ledge
where it sprays widely. Mike Sunderman rigged the pit and Steve Rees-
man (23) went down first. He looked down and let the others know it
would indeed be wet. At the bottom he found an overhang where he could
observe the next rappeller.
Angie Manon (21) descended smoothly to the ledge where she pushed
away and made a quarter turn; after passing the ledge she swung back
into the wall sideways. At that point she screamed and yelled down that
her hair was caught in her rack. She asked for a bottom belay but this only
pulled her into the main waterfall.
Reesman ascended to the victim, who's head was now completely
against the rack. He attached a Jumar and sling to her seat harness and to
the main line above the rack. Reesman descended and got off rope.
Manon was then able to de-rig her rack. It took her some time to attach her
own ascenders and free the now-jammed Jumar; she soon backed down
the rope to the bottom.
Reesman was soaked and after some discussion it was decided that he
would leave while Manon rested. Manon then exited under her own
power.
Reference: Steve Reesman "An Incident at Sawmill Well" The Michigan
Caver Vol XIV, February 1987, p 30.
Analysis: The cavers involved were experienced and had practiced with
their vertical gear, giving this the appearance of a minor incident. Yet it
was a serious situation with hypothermia a life-threatening possibility.
Anything that is loose on the upper part of a caver's person-shirt
sleeve, hair, helmet strap, harness strap, get caught in the
rappel device. This seems a triviality, but the consequences can be
serious.
C-caver fall


********** January 3, 1987
Cueva del Borrego, Mexico
On January 3, a team of cavers was surveying in Cueva del Borrego
near Conrado Castillo in northern Mexico. Pat Kambesis (34) was at a
station trying to get a shot with compass or clinometer when she slipped
backwards. One foot went into a hole in the floor and she fell, injuring a
knee. She was able to exit under her own power. The knee was painful for
several weeks. (Rick Rhinehart "Caving People" Rocky Mountain Caving
Spring, 1987 p 6; Pat Kambesis Personal Communication July 1988).

---------- Page 6 ----------
A-rockfall


********** January 4, 1987
Ellison's Cave, Georgia
At 10 am on January 4, Joe Orr and Bill Putnam (27) entered Ellison's
Cave on Pigeon Mountain near Lafayette, Georgia. Their objective was to
map a route from the Attic down to the Stream Junction. They descended
the 125 foot Warm-up Pit and did the canyon traverse to the Attic. Past 586
foot Fantastic Pit, they crawled along a narrow ledge into the All-In-One
Room.
A 650 foot rope was rigged by them to a large boulder. They began
surveying, proceeding down a 40 foot drop and the next drop, 374 feet, on
the one rope. This brought then to a breakdown room overlooking the
south end of TAG Hall where they began searching the breakdown for the
route to the Stream Junction.
They knew the route involved chimneying down and concentrated their
search on the walls of the room. At about 3 p.m., Putnam located the
chimney but found it a bit wide for his taste. Looking for an alternate route,
he descended a narrow, adjacent slot to where a large breakdown slab
was wedged. He tested this by "kicking and pushing on it vigorously." It
seemed solid so he descended onto it, to a kneeling position. At one corner
of the slab was a ''football sized" rock that appeared loose and to be a
danger to further descent. He reached over and "tested" it. When he
moved it, the slab fell away from under him.
Six feet down, the slab bounced off the right wall and jammed against
the left wall, pinning Putnam's right foot against the left wall. His inertia
carried him over the edge of the slab, twisting and fracturing his lower
right leg, leaving him hanging, upside-down, from the injured limb.
Orr was nearby and responded to the rockfall noise and Putnam's calls,
reaching him within seconds. He was able to lift the slab, freeing
Putnam's foot. There was no place to lie down at the bottom of the
chimney so they decided to try to move to the top of the chimney.
Compresses were applied to control bleeding and Putnam's extra-long
rack was used as a splint with a cave pack for padding. The splint was
tied in place with pieces of survey tape. Putnam was then belayed and
assisted up the 12 foot climb. The victim was then 1,000 feet horizontally
from and 580 feet below the entrance.
After Putnam had been made comfortable and treated for shock, they
discussed the alternatives. Self rescue seemed out of the question due to
the lack of personnel and difficult traverses and pits on the route out. A
rescue call-out list was in their truck. Putnam was supplied with food,
water and warm clothing; at 4 p.m. Orr headed out to call for help. He
exited without incident and notified the Walker County Sheriff's Office in
Lafayette. The Walker County Cave Rescue Squad was called and support
from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources was requested.
At 9:30 p.m. the first rescuers came within voice contact with Putnam.
He quickly reminded them of the connection to TAG Hall and the "easier"
evacuation route up Fantastic Pit. This avoided the unstable rock and
tricky traverses of the victim's route.
At 10 p.m. a rescuer reached Putnam and helped him into an exposure
bag and added heat packs. The make-shift splint was replaced with a
proper one; Putnam was then assisted over the breakdown to the lip of the
drop into TAG Hall. He was lowered without incident.
An EMT and evacuation team were waiting for him. He was helped to a
place relatively safe from rockfall and examined. During this, rockfall
occurred and the victim was shielded by rescuers using a SKED. Two
rescuers suffered hand injuries. The victim was fitted to the SKED and
transported to the base of Fantastic Pit.
There was a 15 minute delay while sufficient rope was rigged; Putnam
was then attached by both the rope and SKED and raised up the pit by
counter-balance. Ten feet below the Balcony Ledge a "grab-loop" at the
head of the SKED snagged on a projection. Putnam informed those above
and a line was rigged and a rescuer descended to free the SKED. The lift
continued but was soon halted as the haul line tangled with the
communications wire. The wire was released at the bottom and the lift
continued. Some rockfall occurred but no one was hit.
At the top, the victim was moved to a flat area and allowed to rest. More
hot packs were placed in the exposure bag as Putnam had become chilled
from the spray during the lift.
The victim was transported down a 30 foot drop, across breakdown to
the Warm-Up Room, and up the Warm-Up Pit. The SKED was placed in a
Stokes litter and Putnam was transported thus to the entrance, some 800
feet away. At this point, the SKED was removed from the Stokes. The
narrow entrance required some tricky maneuvering and caused some pain
to the victim; who nevertheless reached the surface at 7:15 am (Monday).
There were 54 in-cave rescuers.
The victim had suffered multiple open fractures of the tibia and fibula of
his right leg.
References:
1) Tom Vines 'Impossible' Rescue Successfully Performed"
Birmingham Grotto Newsletter 18(5) May 1987; also in RASS Register
July 1987, p 9-10, and Response! March/April 1987, p 7-8.
2) Bill Putnam "Accident and Rescue in Ellison's Cave, Georgia-the
Victim's Perspective" Georgia Underground (Dogwood City Grotto) June
1987, p 6-11.
3) John Harmon "Man saved after caving accident" The Atlanta
Constitution Tuesday, January 6, 1987.
4) John Harmon "Injured explorer spends all night in mountain cave" The
Atlanta Journal Monday, January 5, 1987.
Analysis: Putnam states that "caving with a party of two precluded
any attempt at self rescue." Indeed, I think that the smaller the party size,
the more ready one must be to attempt a self rescue.
The big mistake, as Putnam admits, is in moving something that even
might be a chockstone. But once the accident occurred, the cavers
certainly seem to have done the right things and the victim's positive
attitude must have helped. Ellison's is cold (59 degree F) and an accident
victim could easily slip into hypothermia.
Putnam complains about the lack of administration of a pain killer, yet
refused percodan when it was offered. From his description of the rescue,
however, it is apparent that his pain was not excruciating and rescuers
would probably do well not to complicate a medical emergency (accident)
with the off-hand administration of drugs. The same goes for food and
drink if there is any chance of internal injuries.
Putnam points out that it was not possible to get him completely into the
exposure bag due to the pain of his leg, and suggests that some other
design is necessary. He also suggests goggles for the victim to keep dirt
and debris out of his eyes.
The description of the rescue makes the "impossible" rescue seem
easy. Surely this is entirely a tribute to the expertise and energy of the
rescuers. I wonder how this rescue would have gone in 1975?
C-rockfall


********** January 5, 1987
Ellison's Cave, Georgia
On January 4 a caver was injured in a rockfall near TAG Hall in Ellison's
Cave in Georgia. While being evaluated by rescuers, some additional
rockfall occurred, and the rescuers had to use a SKED to shield the victim.
A "plate-sized" rock hit Beth Elliot on the hand and another rescuer
suffered a cut finger. (Bill Putnam "Accident and Rescue in Ellison's


********** Cave, Georgia: The Victim's Perspective" Georgia Underground June
1987, 7-8.)
B-equipment failure


********** January 10, 1987
Rocky Hollow Cave, Virginia
On January 10, a group of four young men (18 to 21) entered the 55
foot entrance pit on a knotted polypropylene rope. They explored for a
while.
To make their exit, they attempted to climb, hand-over-hand, the
knotted rope, but could only make it to a ledge about 30 feet up. At 5:30
p.m., they lay down to await help.
Later, authorities were alerted and rescuers, including three rescue
squads and C.A.V.E.S. Region cavers, responded. The group was found
asleep on the ledge at 5:15 am the following morning. They were fitted
with climbing rigs and given instruction in the use of the ascending gear.

---------- Page 7 ----------
They then left the cave under their own power.
Reference: Ed. "Four rescued from Rocky Hollow" Caves and Cavers
(CAVES Region Newsletter) March 1987.
Analysis: This sort of thing is probably doomed to continue. The knotted
rope for vertical caving is a well-established myth outside the caving
community.
C-caver fall
January 1987
Coldwater Cave, Iowa
On a trip into Coldwater Cave, Don Smith "stumbled and fell, injuring
his knee." He was able to exit under his own power. (Anon. "Coldwater
Cave News" N.C.R. News undated (mid 1987), p 20.
D-rockfall
Winter-A 1986-87
Canyon Cavern, Colorado
In Canyon Cavern, Fremont County, Colorado, a caver was ascending a
drop when a "rock the size of an engine block" was dislodged by only "a
slight nudge of his elbow." The excess rope on the bottom was nearly
severed when the rock hit. (Bob Fordon, Rocky Mountain Caving Spring,
1987).
D-other
Winter-B 1986-87
Bear Trap Cave, Utah
Dave Herron entered a new cave through a crawl tube. Ten feet in, he
came to a room containing large specimens of dried animal dung. While
backing out, he was suddenly attacked as "jaws of steel" clamped onto
his knee. He pried the beast off and threw it against the wall. Another was
"killed" with a stick. The animal traps had been hidden under the dirt of
the floor. (Dave Herron "Cavers Beware" The Underground News 14(1)
(Timpanogos Grotto) Jan-March 1987, 7).
D-rockfall
Winter-C 1986-87
Massanutten Caverns, Virginia
During renovation work on the cave, Brad Cobb, the owner, was
working on re-wiring the lighting system with some student volunteers. At
one point on the tour path, Cobb was knocked to one side when a portion
of the wall collapsed onto one of his legs. One student received a glancing
blow on his helmet. Cobb was freed and found to be uninjured. (Brad Cobb
Groundhog(Shenandoah Valley Grotto) June/July 1987, 3).
A-other (unknown)
Winter-D 1986-87
Wolff Cave, Alabama
A caver with a shoulder injury was rescued from Wolff Cave in Alabama
by Brindley Mountain Fire Department volunteers. It was reported that the
one hour rescue was completed in a scant six hours. (Ed. "Trip Reports"
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 29(3) March 1987).
D-caver fall
February 1987
Coldwater Cave, Iowa
At the Waterfall Room, beyond Mud Canyon, Wanda's Walkway, the Pig
Trough and Cascade Passage, three cavers were attempting to climb the
waterfall to an obvious lead at the top. They had a "folding grappling
hook" and after a couple of tosses, the hook, with a caving rope attached,
became lodged at the lip of the falls. Using this as a handline, one caver
480 NSS News: December 1988
attempted to free-climb the "roaring" falls. Part way up, his numbed
hands lost their grip and he fell/slid an unspecified distance. He suffered
only a bruise on his right ankle. (Anon. "Coldwater Cave News'' N.C.R.
News undated (mid 1987), p 21.
A-rockfall


********** February 13, 1987
Cave in the Canoe Creek Mine, Pennsylvania
At about 1:30 p.m. on Friday, February 13, a group of bat specialists,
led by Jim Kennedy, entered a cave intersected by the Canoe Creek Mine
(no natural entrance). At about 3:30, Kennedy was standing on a steep
talus slope including three rocks of 300 pounds or SO. Suddenly the slope
collapsed, carrying Kennedy over the edge of a pit. He apparently didn't
fall very far, but was obviously injured and in great pain.
It took little time to get help and within an hour the local fire department
had arrived and placed the victim on a litter with hot packs to prevent
hypothermia. Nittany Grotto rescuers soon arrived and spent three hours
rigging and lifting the victim up 60 feet to a small opening that led down to
a mine passage. Kennedy was carried out of the mine by 10:30 p.m. and
evacuated by helicopter to Altoona hospital for stabilization before being
taken to West Virginia Medical Center at Morgantown. He had suffered a
fracture on both sides of his pelvis.
Reference: G. C. "Caving Accident" Cave Hunter (Huntingdon County)
April 1987.
Analysis: Rockfall can occur in situations from the apparently stable to
the obviously unstable. Perhaps we should regard any obvious instability
as something desiring to do us harm and treat it accordingly.
D-equipment failure


********** February 15, 1987
Fern Cave, Alabama
On February 15, a group of three cavers was doing 400- foot Surprise
Pit in Alabama. They decided to ascend in tandem as a "triple." About
170 feet up, Philip Moss, the second in ascent, suffered an equipment
failure when the webbing attaching his foot Gibbs to his foot stirrup broke.
He had noticed a fray in the webbing on earlier trips but had not been
moved to replace it; now he felt it was time. The good news was that his
chicken loop was long enough to tie the Gibbs to his stirrup and still go
around his ankle. The bad news was that he had left his third ascender, a
Jumar, in the truck, so he had to hang from one ascender while making
the repair. (Philip Moss "Fern Cave" Crawlway Courier Spring 1987, p
4).
B-flood


********** February 28, 1987
Fisher Cave, Tennessee
On Sunday, February 28, four people went exploring in Fisher Cave,
about 50 miles southeast of Nashville. Rain raised the water level in the
cave and trapped the group. When they failed to return home at 6 p.m., as
scheduled, relatives notified the authorities. The Cannon County Rescue
Squad responded and sent a diver into the flooded cave. The four were
found in an air filled room; until the water level dropped to release them,
they were taken supplies in waterproof bags. (Ed. "Four Rescued in
Tennessee" The Texas Caver June 1987, p 66).
AA-flood; drowning, hypothermia


********** February 28, 1987
Miller Cave, Iowa
At about 12:30 p.m. on Saturday, February 28, a group of cavers from
Grinnell College entered Miller Cave near Postville in Allamakee County,
Iowa. This trip was sponsored by the Grinnell Outdoor Recreation
Program. The five students were led by Kathy McKluskey, assistant

---------- Page 8 ----------
professor of geology and physical education, and Mike Price, a technical
assistant in Computer Services. Rain was in the forecast and the skies
were overcast as they rappelled the 110 foot, mostly free entrance drop.
This entrance pit is in a ravine with a normally dry streambed leading to it.
A little before 2:00 p.m., a soft rain began to fall; this increased at 4:30
and by 5:30 had become both steady and heavy. Later in the evening it
turned to snow, yielding a 4 to 6 inch accumulation.
The group finished their explorations and began to exit. One student
reached the surface when water began flooding down the streambed and
cascading into the pit. The second up got wet, and the third was soaked
as the water flow increased. The rope apparently could not be isolated
from the flow.
Mike Price (29) attempted to ascend but had trouble part way up and
could not proceed. A second rope (either rigged then or at the time of their
entry) was utilized by Kathy McKluskey (38) to ascend to Price in an
attempt to help. She, too, ran into difficulties part way up and could
neither proceed nor descend.
Meanwhile, Richard Bart and Matt Stone found a side passage for
shelter from the spray and waited for help.
At 9:00 p.m. the lowa Grotto was called and mobilized rescuers to work
with the law enforcement agencies already on the scene. The stream
flowing into the cave was diverted using earth moving equipment and sand
bags; haul systems were set up. Price was found dead from hypothermia
60 feet above the floor and McKluskey dead from drowning 40 feet below
him. Bart and Stone were found cold and weak and were hauled to the
surface.
References:
1) Editor "A Tragic Milestone" Intercom 23(1) Jan/Feb, 1987, p 4-5.2)
Editor "Tragic Cave Accident Results in 2 Deaths" North Country Region
News March, 1987, p 20.
3) Editor "Campus Mourns Deaths of McKlusky and Price" The Grinnell
Magazine 19(3), 2.
Analysis: Even tragedies like this must be analyzed for the sake of the
living. Surely those who die would want it SO. In this fatality there are
several clear messages:
The first is the failure to heed the weather. Any cave is potentially
affected by bad weather, but one with a streambed leading to a pit
entrance should be avoided.
Second is the decision to proceed out when water began cascading
down. In unexpected circumstances, it is normal to panic a bit and believe
that the situation will be resolved if you can just get out. What you need to
realize is that in some cases, it is not possible to get out-if you "go for
it," you may pay for it. To wait it out is a difficult decision to come to, but
at times it must be done.
Last but not least, is the business of the winter season. Caving in winter
must be looked upon quite differently from caving in summer. The water in
this cave was near freezing-to ascend in it without very specialized
clothing and gear is virtually suicide. To ascend in a cool summer flood
would be dicey-to do SO in freezing winter water was almost certain
death.
B-caver fall


********** March 7, 1987
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
On Saturday, March 7, a group of seven visited Tumbling Rock Cave
(AL 171) in Jackson County Alabama, entering at about 8:30 am. They
"were well-equipped," with one flashlight per person and well-hydrated,
several having been drinking the night before and shortly before entering.
At 9:30 am, Thomas Grady Webb (23) was following a friend climbing a
6-foot boulder when he slipped, falling back about six feet. He landed "on
his back with his right leg bent under him and also struck his head. He
was unconscious for about one and a half hours. About the time he came
to, a group from Huntsville Grotto encountered the victim's party.
The victim insisted on trying to walk out, but collapsed after 100 feet.
He was covered with a space blanket, warmed with carbide lamps and a
caver was sent for help. At 1:30 p.m., a litter arrived and the victim was
transported out of the cave, still somewhat intoxicated. He had suffered no
injuries. (Ed. "Rescue" Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 29(3) March 1987).
D-rockfall


********** April 4, 1987
Virgin Cave, New Mexico
As Pat Kambesis was climbing on rope up a drop in Virgin Cave, Eddy
County, New Mexico, a rock from a talus slope she was on fell and cut the
sheath of the excess rope at the bottom of the drop. (Pat Kambesis "Virgin
Cave" SW Cavers May-June 1987).
C-caver fall


********** April 11, 1987
Grindstaff Cave, Tennessee
Three cavers entered Grindstaff cave, Carter County, Tennessee, at
about 11 a.m. They proceeded to a dome with a lead about 25 feet above
the floor. From the lead issued a small waterfall. At about noon, Mike
Hobbs (20) tried unsuccessfully to climb to the lead. Then he and Greg
Kramer went to a ledge about 18 feet up and set up a belay. From there
Hobbs was able to climb to the lead.
He checked it out and was climbing down when a handhold broke and
he fell; the belay stopped him three feet from the floor, but he
pendulummed into the wall, the force of this being taken by his buttocks
and battery pack. He had a painful bruise but exited under his own power.
Reference: Greg Kramer "Caving Accident Report" Bat Times Vol 7,
1987, 7.
Analysis: Not much of an incident but that is the point-the use of a
belay possibly prevented serious injury, death, rescue, obituaries, etc.
Falling is no sin-falling without a belay is.
D-equipment failure


********** April 19, 1987
Mystery Cave, Missouri
On April 19, five cavers entered Mystery Cave, Perry County, Missouri,
to do climbing pole leads. They tried one that didn't go, then headed to
Spider Pit. One caver had gone out, SO Joe Slivinski, George DeSaegher,
Philip Moss and Charlie Paine proceeded with the setup. They found it
difficult with only four, but got the pole three-fourths erected when it
jammed on an outcrop. Moss and Slivinski were holding the base about
four feet off the ground while DeSaegher held the guy line and Paine fitted
on sections. They lowered the pole, but the top section was not bolted,
lifted out of its sleeve and fell. Fortunately it missed them.
They cited lack of manpower as a factor as well as Perlon guy lines that
stretched a lot more than the one-inch webbing used previously and
allowed less control, but the real problem was the lack of a bolt to keep the
sections from separating. (Charlie Paine "Crevice 'Cave'' Crawlway
Courier Spring, 1987).
A-rockfall


********** May 2, 1987
Fisher Ridge Cave System, Kentucky
On May 2, two cavers were exploring in the Fisher Ridge Cave System,
near Mammoth Cave in Kentucky. Bob Anderson did a difficult free climb
into a lead and found that it seemed to go. They rigged a cable ladder and
Keith Ortiz started to climb up. He was only two or three steps up when a
"small flake" fell from above. He bounded left on the ladder to get out of
the way only to dislodge a 100 pound rock. He jumped off the ladder
backwards, landing on his behind on a boulder, his body continuing back
until his head bounced off the edge of the boulder. Ortiz was not seriously
injured but had to be helped from the cave by Anderson.
It is surprising, as Ortiz says, that the wall did not show signs of
instability during the free-climb, but "on closer inspection (it) was a

---------- Page 9 ----------
fractured mess." (Keith Ortiz "Another Fisher Ridge Accident Report"
DUG Scoops October, 1987 p7).
C-rockfall


********** May 6, 1987
Thunderdome Cave, Tennessee
On May 6, three cavers were pushing a new cave in Fentress County,
Tennessee. They proceed down four drops to the bottom but found no
leads. Mike Russell was first to start out and was 15 feet off the floor when
several baseball-sized rocks fell from near the top of the 54 foot drop. One
struck Russell on the helmet, knocking his Wheat lamp off. Another hit
Mike Rogers on the forearm as he provided rope tension to get Russell's
rope walker rig going.
Russell had a sore neck and Rogers a large bruise. They proceeded out
without further incident.
The top of the drop was in the St. Louis limestone, a crumbly formation.
It is especially important in new descents to clear loose rock before
descending. (Mike Rogers "Thunderdome Cave Accident Report"
undated, 3 pages).
A-caver fall


********** May 16, 1987
Stinging Nettle Cave, Tennessee
On May 16, a group of cavers from the Highland Grotto were exploring
in Stinging Nettle Cave, west of Jamestown, Tennessee. At about 2 p.m.
Gether Russell (50+) fell about 10 feet, injuring his right hip and side. He
was able to walk for about 500 feet to the start of the crawls and climbs of
the last 300 feet to the entrance. His companions fetched a sleeping bag
(they were having a campout in the entrance) and hot food and drink. One
went to a phone and called for assistance.
The East Tennessee Grotto responded and began to arrive at 10 p.m.
The entrance was too small for a Ferno-Washington litter, SO the victim
was secured in a drag-litter (a piece of conveyor belt with handles). Three
hauling systems were rigged and the entrance was enlarged and
stabilized. Russell was out by 3 a.m. He had suffered only bruises.
(Patricia Daugherty "Stinging Nettle" undated, 1 page).
B-hypothermia
May 23-A, 1987
Lowe's (Fritz-Breathing) Cave, Virginia
On Saturday evening, May 23, six cavers entered Lowe's Cave,
Washington County, Virginia. This required descent of a "45 foot
compound scree slope, 18 feet to a ledge, then a 25 foot slope curving to
the left. They caved for some time.
As they started back from the end, Jeanie London started feeling cold
and her ''vision started to blur.' At the pit (about 4 a.m.), she felt ''very
weak and cold" and was unable to climb out. Cavers on the surface were
alerted and a hauling system rigging was begun. Meanwhile warm
clothes, food and drinks were brought to the victim. At 7 a.m. London was
hauled up the pit.
References:
1) Jeanie London "Lowe's Cave" RASS Register July 1987, p 11.
2) Betty McCauley "CAVES Region Fieldhouse" ibid. p 10-11.
3) Anthony McGee "NSS Accident Report" undated.
Analysis: Your energy level will usually be lowest in the wee hours of the
morning. Moreover, the victim had had a tiring day and little supper.
A-rockfall
May 23-B, 1987
Luddington's Cave, West Virginia
In the afternoon of Saturday, May 23, four cavers, Bill Balfour, Jim and
Darlene Borden, and George Dasher, were attempting to enter the Bell
482 NSS News: December 1988
entrance of Luddington's Cave in Greenbrier County, West Virginia. This
entrance had suffered a collapse some 10 years before but was still open.
They could feel cold air and bats were occasionally flying out.
A short chimney down led through the collapsed area; just beyond was
a low crawlway. Balfour, Jim Borden, and Dasher descended the chimney.
Balfour tried the crawlway but couldn't make it through an especially low
place, even with his helmet off. He turned back while Borden, also in the
crawl, handed Balfour's helmet and light to Dasher who passed it up to
Darlene Borden. At about 6 p.m. Dasher started up the chimney.
When he put his foot against the back wall, it dislodged a slab of rock
about one and a half by two by four feet that was tapered, one end much
larger than the other. This fell three to four feet, landing on Jim Borden
(31) who was exiting the crawl. The small end of the slab landed on his
right shoulder, back and head while the heavy end hit an elevated part of
the floor, just in front of him. A piece of the slab broke off, hitting Borden's
right knee and landing in front of Balfour's face.
Dasher immediately climbed back down and pivoted the block off of
Borden. A few seconds later, Borden moaned; soon he was able to
converse and after a couple of minutes he was able to get up and climb up
the chimney, out of the cave. He had suffered only bruises.
References:
1) George Dasher West Virginia Caver 5(3), June 1987, p 14.
2) George Dasher Personal Communication May 27, 1987.
Analysis: Borden, wearing a Joe Brown helmet, was reportedly lucky
the rock fell just the way it did.
One thing seems clear from the reports of recent years-rock fall is one
of the prime hazards in caves and is much more common than once
thought to be the case. It can probably happen anywhere, but in areas of
obvious instability it is well to be a bit paranoid of your movements and
those of your companions.
B-rockfall
May 24-A, 1987
Un-named Cave, California
On the morning of May 24, a group of four teenagers was caving at Lava
Beds National Monument, in California across the border from (south of)
Klamath Falls, Oregon. These were Kevin and Mike Smith, Kevin Atkinson
(16), and John Adams (14). There are numerous ungated lava caves in
the monument and tourists as well as cavers are encouraged to explore.
Kevin and Mike Smith entered Skull Cave while Atkinson and Adams
poked around in a collapse hole a short distance from the wilderness trail
from the Skull Cave parking lot, just beyond the trail register.
At around 10 a.m., Atkinson found a hole leading down into the
breakdown and entered. This led to a small chamber. Adams, meanwhile,
was clambering around the hole when the sides collapsed, trapping both
cavers.
The other two soon exited Skull Cave and went to the trail register,
looking for their companions. They heard yelling from the nearby hole and
soon learned what had happened. Kevin Smith headed for the visitor
center at the Indian Wells Headquarters and at 10:20 a.m. reported the
incident.
A number of Park Service personnel were dispatched to the scene and
the situation, two trapped with a possible injury, was soon assessed. It
was obvious that a lot of rock would have to be moved; one victim was
complaining of numbness in his extremities and possibly had a crushed
leg.
Assistance was requested of the California Highway Patrol and Sheriff's
Office and an ambulance and fire engine were called from the nearby town
of Tulelake. They began moving rocks, assisted by four "well-
equipped' cavers from the San Francisco Bay Chapter, N.S.S., who
coincidentally were at the scene.
At 10:45 a helicopter was requested in case quick medical evacuation
proved necessary. The nearest, a California Department of Forestry craft,
responded from Bieber.
When CHP and Sheriff's personnel arrived, the Skull Cave parking lot

---------- Page 10 ----------
was cleared of cars to make it available as a helicopter landing pad. CDF
copter 202 arrived at 11:30. An EMT from the copter stationed herself
near the collapse and communicated with Adams to help keep up his
morale.
Meanwhile Park Service personnel placed themselves in very
hazardous positions in moving rocks and stabilizing the walls of the hole
with wood braces. One climbed in the unstable hole to take measurements
which were passed to others above who would cut the required length
brace with a chain saw; this would be passed down and hammered into
place. Jacks were also used. Gradually the walls were stabilized and a
portapower could be used to move the rocks trapping the victims.
At 12:55 Atkinson was freed. He appeared to suffer from shock, but
had only minor abrasions otherwise. He was placed on a backboard and
removed from the hole. At 1 p.m. he was flown to Merle West Medical
Center in Klamath Falls.
At about 1:15 p.m. Lassen County rescue was placed on standby in
case collapse occurred and rescuers were trapped.
At 2 p.m. Adams was freed, removed on a backboard and also flown to
Klamath Falls, Oregon. He was also in shock but had no broken bones.
References:
1) Ken Hay Untitled Incident Report Lava Beds National Monument, 3 pp.
2) Ken Miller SBFC Newsletter June 1987.
Analysis: The two had been caving for over a year but showed poor
judgement in climbing down into unstable rocks. Such things are
dangerous even if you kick each one for stability on the way down. The
one that proves to be unstable may be one at the bottom, supporting all
those above. Kick it, and the roof falls in.
Atkinson had bought a helmet at the visitor center-it is still in the hole,
wedged between rocks.
D-rockfall
May 24-B, 1987
Lowe's Cave, Virginia
On a trip to Lowe's Cave, Washington County, Virginia, a group of six
was descending a 45 foot scree slope when a 400 pound rock was
dislodged. Everyone shouted "Rock!" and no one was hit. (Jeannie
London "Lowe's Cave" RASS Register July 1987, p 11).
A-stuck caver
May 24-C, 1987
Butler Cave, Virginia
On Sunday, May 24, a party of four was surveying in Butler Cave, Bath
County, Virginia. A fissure was found with an hourglass shaped stream
passage at the bottom. Gary Haynes (23) chimneyed down to assess it for
a survey.
He proceeded for a short way, his body in the upper, wide part of the
hourglass and his legs in the slot. The going was difficult and when he
relaxed to rest, he became wedged. Apparently in communication with
those above, he struggled for 10 to 20 minutes, without success. Toni
Williams climbed down to help. Haynes' carbide lamp was out, being
jammed with mud.
The lamp was fixed and a half-hour of cooperative struggle got Haynes
into a position where he could get one leg free of projections restraining his
movement. Then by pushing with his arms against the sloping walls,
above the slot, and with one foot against a wall projection, he got free.
He was very fatigued but after a rest he got back up the chimney and
was able to make the several mile trip back to the entrance. He had
bruised and strained a knee.
Reference: Toni Williams "Self-Rescue, Butler Cave" unpublished report,
undated, 1 page.
Analysis: Toni Williams states: a narrowing crevice, one of the most
treacherous types of passage and the most difficult to rescue someone
from. His initial struggles apparently only wedged him further.'
"Considering the exact shape and dimensions of the outcropping
passage, and the location far into the cave through several very tight
passages, a full-scale rescue would have been extremely difficult and
quite possibly unsuccessful.' Haynes' "calm presence of mind,
patience, and determination" may have saved him.
C-caver fall


********** May 30, 1987
Elm Tree Cave, Kansas
Hillary Racker, part of a party of eight in Elm Tree Cave, Comanche
County, Kansas, apparently slipped and cut her forehead on sharp
gypsum. The cut required stitches to close it. (J. Young "Trip Reports"
Kansas Kaver 4(4) July 1981, p 6).
C-equipment failure
June 1987
Natural Trap Cave, Wyoming
While rappelling into the pit entrance of Natural Trap Cave in the
northern Bighorn Mountains of Wyoming, a caver went to take off a bar
from his rappel rack. A couple more popped off, putting the rappeller into
free fall. He fell 30-40 feet, but landed on plywood covering an excavation.
The plywood sheet acted to break the fall. There were no serious injuries.
(Bill Holmes Personnel Communication June 1988).
C-caver fall


********** July 17, 1987
Cristal Caverns, New Mexico
A group of three entered Cristal Caverns in New Mexico after 9 p.m. for
an evening ''tourist trip. One caver, while climbing close to the floor, had
a handhold break, lost his footing and fell about eight feet. His helmet was
knocked off in the process and he received a head wound and a bruised
hip. The bleeding was stopped with pressure on the wound and one
companion went for help. Before rescuers could enter, he exited under his
own power. The wound required five stitches. (Ray Keeler "Gypcap, N.M.
Project Weekend" Arizona Caver August 1987).
D-rock fall


********** July 18, 1987
Pink Panther Cave, New Mexico
A group of eight was exploring in Pink Panther Cave in the Guadalupe
Mountains in New Mexico on July 18. At a 50 foot pit they apparently
failed to clean the edge of the drop of loose rocks. One dislodged and fell,
destroying a camera flash unit. (Jim Nance "Pink Panther, Pink Palette,
Den Caves" PPSS Spylunk 4(5) undated).
A-equipment failure, caver fall
July 18A, 1987
McFail's Cave, New York
At 9:30 a.m. on July 18, a group of cavers led by John Schweyen
entered McFail's Cave by the Hall's Hole entrance. They descended
Coeyman's Dome and went through the crawl to the first drop. It had been
rigged with two etriers. One caver went down but didn't stick around.
Jill McMahon (30) descended but had trouble getting her toes into the
foot loops since they did not hang open. She was forced to hang on with
one hand, lean down, hold the loop open and insert a foot-and this
procedure for each step.
As she got below the overhanging portion, one foot slipped out of its
stirrup unexpectedly, dropping her four to five feet into the shallow pool at
the bottom. This sprained her right ankle. She got up and "walked it off''
but at the next drop she fell again when her left knee "gave out" as she
was chimneying down.
This fall was also short resulting in no further injury but now when she
got up, things were "shifting and popping" in her knee. She could
continue only by "stepping carefully. She convinced herself that things

---------- Page 11 ----------
were OK and proceeded.
The pain and instability remained, however, and the knee gave out five
or six times more. She continued on under her own power, carrying the
lightest bag of dive gear on the way out. Dick Desjardins accompanied her
out, providing needed assistance on the two short drops.
References:
1) Jill McMahon "McFail's Cave Accident" Northeast Caver 18(3) 1987,
p 83.
2) Jill McMahon NSS Accident Report, December 11, 1987, 2 pages.
Analysis: McMahon has been diagnosed as having permanent cartilage
and ligament damage in the injured knee, resulting in permanent
instability. She continues caving but has to wear a brace and move
carefully.
McMahon admits to denying her problem in the cave and continuing.
Yet victims of accidents often insist they are all right-it is up to the leader
of a group like this to make a judgement. Were none of her falls observed?
What were her companions doing?
An etrier left for descent of a work-route is nonsense. Such a thing is
OK for the first descent, if that is all you have and want to push on. But
when a route becomes well-traveled, such mickey-mouse rigging should
be replaced. At McFail's this has now been done, but only after someone
was badly injured. It is surprising that there was no lawsuit.
In short climbs like this, it is always useful for a companion to "spot" a
climber-to be prepared to break their fall if they get in trouble. This
assumes, of course, that the group is using a Buddy System that there
is even someone around.
A-caver fall
July 18-B, 1987
Crowbar Cave, New Mexico
On Saturday morning, July 18, two groups of cavers were looking at
some newly accessible caves in New Mexico. Diamond Cave was found
to indeed be blasted shut, but was enterable for a short distance.
"Crowbar" Cave pinched out and appeared to not be that cave, which
was supposed to go.
The group had broken up into teams and finally the real Crowbar Cave
was found-big passage with a breeze. One team of three cavers was
surveying Diamond. Two teams of three began surveying Crowbar,
leap-frog style. One team was Ray Keeler, Duke McMullen and Linda
Starr, the other was Dave Belski, John Holbrook and Jay They were
soon joined by the Diamond Cave team.
The survey went slowly with short traverse legs. When the Ray Keeler
team came to a lake with one to two feet of air space as far as they could
see, they turned back.
One hundred feet back was a large room where they took a few
photos. At 6 p.m. McMullen suggested that Linda Starr climb up on a
ledge next to a dome, to provide scale for a photo. As she stood balanced
there, she decided to change her footing. As she moved, she slipped.
Starr reached out "suddenly and automatically" to catch herself. There
followed "a sharp and absolute pain' in her upper left arm or shoulder.
She could hardly lower it to her side.
She was guided into the Big Room, out of the breeze, with a possibly
broken, but more likely a dislocated, shoulder. A small ensolite pad was
provided for her to sit on and a sweater for warmth.
Starr was in great pain but the group had no pain medication. Keeler
went for help in case she could not make it out on her own. There was a
couple of climbs, a crawl and 2,000 feet of passage to negotiate.
Help began to arrive in just an hour; a little later more cavers came,
bringing a codeine pain-killer. They made two unsuccessful attempts to
relocate the shoulder, then bound it to her body with webbing and the
victim started out.
Human ladders helped her up the climbs; the crawl went well, and
about 80 minutes later she was out. At the hospital she had to wait until
3:30 a.m. for treatment to begin.
484 NSS News: December 1988
References:
1) Linda Starr "Cave Bloopers" Southwestern Cavers Sept-Oct 1987, p
8-9.
2) Ray Keeler "Gypcap, N.M. Project Weekend" Arizona Caver August
1987; additional info bid.September 1987.
Analysis: How easy it seems to happen-a joint dislocation and a
caver is incapacitated. What could one do to prevent this? If you have a
history of dislocations, you must train yourself not to catch a fall with the
weak limb. Also recognize that having the proper reflex to falls is very
important. If you don't have it, try martial arts training- proper falling
reflex is part of it.
C-caver fall
July 18-C, 1987
Millerton Lake Caves, California
A large group of cavers was visiting the Millerton Lake talus
stream-cave system in Fresno County on July 18. A group was making
its way through the Middle Cave, when one caver took a fall, receiving
only "nasty bruises." The fall may have occurred while trying to climb
around pools in order to keep dry. (Dave Bunnell "Millerton Trip Report:
Biggest yet" Better Caves and Sinkholes Summer 1987, p 15.
A-rockfall


********** July 19, 1987
Un-Named Pit, Virginia
On Sunday, July 19, cavers were exploring a new cave in Virginia,
consisting of a series of offset vertical drops. The first drop (entrance
pit) is 70 feet to an offset, then a 47 foot drop takes one to a ledge. The
sequence of events is not exactly clear, but at about 6 p.m. Greg McCoy
(31) was standing on the edge when a caver below him did something
on rope that caused the rope (which reached to the surface) to move out
of a notch just below the offset. There was reportedly some mud and
rocks on the slopes, and a five pound rock was
dislodged.
The rock fell some 40 feet, struck McCoy on his Petzel Ecrin helmet,
then deflected, striking his shoulder. McCoy was incapacitated with
a" shoulder trauma" and "bruised, compressed cervical spine.'
Companions went for help and CAVES Region and Triangle Rescue
Group responded. An EMT descended and evaluated the victim, calling
for a hauling system. McCoy was hauled out on a 3:1 "Z" system (two
directionals) and transported to a hospital by private vehicle. He is
reportedly caving again with no complications.
Reference: Anthony McGee NSS Accident Report, undated, 2 pages.
Analysis: The rope, going past offsets, was padded but one must
recognize that it may touch surfaces with loose rock that the rappeller is
unable to clear on the way down-it may be better to re-anchor the rope
at offsets.
The rock struck McCoy's helmet off-center by about two inches,
leaving a dent.
A-equipment failure


********** July 28, 1987
Cave in House Springs, Missouri
In the evening of Tuesday, July 28, a group of six teenagers was
exploring in a cave near Highway MM in House Springs, Missouri. They
descended a 35 foot entrance drop on a rope ladder and explored for
some time.
When they tried to exit, only three made it up the rope ladder. Two
more, Lester Wilcut (18) and Eddie Hanks, were on the ladder when it
broke, dropping them about 20 feet. Those on the surface ran to a
nearby residence and phone for help. The High Ridge Fire Department
and Big River Ambulance Service responded, hauling the three stranded

---------- Page 12 ----------
cavers to safety two hours later. Wilcut was treated for minor leg and
back injuries at the hospital in Kirkwood; Hanks also had only minor
injuries.
Reference: Liz Irwin "Kids fall as Rope Breaks Inside Cave" Meramec
Journal Friday, July 31, 1987.
Analysis: Rope ladder? Perhaps they represented a society for
anachronistic caving. The NSS might eliminate such crudities if we went
public with modern caving techniques.
B-equipment failure


********** July 30, 1987
Alabaster Caverns, Oklahoma
On Thursday afternoon, July 30, two boys, Tommy (13) and Travis
(10) Meritt, went caving at Alabaster Caverns State Park in western
Oklahoma. They had one flashlight each. They apparently entered the
Lower Water Exit and explored for some distance but soon lost one light
as well as one of Tommy's tennis shoes. The remaining light quickly
became too dim to be of much use. They had followed some old string
but it was not continuous and they became lost. Mud marks they had
made on the rocks on the way in were no longer visible. They sat,
huddled together, waiting for help.
The boys were reported missing to the Park Manager by their mother
at 5:40 p.m. Cavers were mobilized and a team entered the Lower Water
Exit at 10:26 p.m., encountering the lost cavers at 11 p.m., cold and
shivering. They were given a few dry clothes and warmed up a bit by
application of warm bodies. After ten minutes, they left under their own
power (11:25 p.m.)
Reference: Editor "Rescue at Alabaster Caverns State Park"
C.O.G.Nizance (Central Oklahoma Grotto) August 7, 1987, 2.
Analysis: Another incident from the "old school'' of spelunking.
C-other (carbide burns)
Summer-A
Doghill-Donahue Cave, Indiana
One summer day a group was doing a cross-over trip in the
Doghill-Donahue Cave System in southern Indiana. Wendy Wall carried
her spent carbide in a plastic bag in her pocket. In the course of
crawling, the bag ruptured resulting in second degree chemical burns
on her thigh. (Wendy Wall "The Sport of Caving: It's Dangerous, Dirty,
Damp-and Popular" Wall Street Journal September 1987.
D-bad air
Summer-B 1987
Un-named Cave, California
Cavers were pushing a new cave southeast of Sacramento, California,
when they suddenly realized the air was bad. Reportedly it was like
knowing you would soon die if you did not get out immediately-you
could not catch a breath. They got out immediately. Since then the bad
air has been found to wax and wane; the cave is still under study. (Paul
Greaves Personal Communication June 1988).
C-caver fall
Summer-C 1987
Tongue River Cave, Wyoming
A group of Girl Scouts had been given a varied program on caving and
cave science by Hole-in-the-Wall Grotto members. The following day
they visited Tongue River Cave in the northern Bighorn Mountains. One
girl suffered minor injuries from a short fall and another suffered briefly
from claustrophobia. (''Grotto Notes" The Outlaw Fall, 1987).
A-caver fall


********** August 1, 1987
Coon Cave, Indiana
On Saturday, August 1, a group of ten cavers decided to visit Coon
Cave, Monroe County, Indiana. They were met at the Buckner Cave
parking lot by Mike Miessen, one of the custodians of Coon Cave, owned
by the Indiana Karst Conservancy. He heard their intentions, assessed
their lack of vertical gear for the entrance drop, and denied them
permission. They said they would go to Brinegar Cave.
Later that day, the group did go to Coon Cave. One of the group tried
to free climb a log in the entrance drop and fell, suffering a broken back.
Miessen was called by the group and initiated a call-out. The injured
caver was evacuated by 3 a.m. without further incident.
Reference: Keith Dunlap "Coon Cave Accident" IKC Update (Indiana
Karst Conservancy) September 1987, p 18.
Analysis: The group was described as "novices" and "horizontally
well-equipped." The injured caver reportedly suffered no permanent
neurological damage.
B-losing the way


********** August 13, 1987
Bowden Cave, West Virginia
At 11 a.m. on Thursday, August 13, a group of three people entered
Bowden Cave, Randolph County, West Virginia, for a cross-over trip from
the Main Entrance to the Third Entrance. These were Doug, Brian and
Steve, experienced rock climbers with almost no caving experience-the
latter two had been in Bowden main trunk passage once before. A camper
at Seneca Rocks had told them of the cross-over trip-they thus knew the
route only through vague, second-hand description. They had a flashlight
each and, though they had them, brought no extra batteries into the cave.
Past the Pendant Room, they encountered the Back Section Maze where
they had to follow the main stream to a passage that goes to the Third
Entrance. Unfortunately, the cave was experiencing very low water
conditions and the stream had sunk into its bed.
They wandered through the low crawls for three hours until their lights
began growing dim. They decided to leave Doug there while the other two
went out for fresh batteries. Brian and Steve found their way out of the
maze and back into the Main Trunk.
At 2 p.m. they encountered Greg and John Springer, experienced
cavers, in the Main Trunk. Brian and Steve exited and proceeded around
to Bickle Hollow to the Third Entrance. They entered but could not find
Doug, though they found the spot where they had left him. They returned
to the Main Entrance, where they again encountered the Springers.
At 4 p.m. it was decided to notify the local rescue squad while Greg
Springer and Brian returned to the maze with extra lights and dry clothes
to search. They gradually retraced the path of Brian and Steve's exit and
finally encountered Doug, though at first voice-contact it was difficult to
locate him due to echoes. He was in a low crawl, very wet, wearing jeans
and a tee-shirt. The three exited the Main Entrance at 7:15 p.m. The
Elkins Volunteer Fire Department rescue squad was about to enter.
Reference: Greg Springer Accident Report December 23, 1987, 5 pages.
Analysis: Surely this is "spelunking" at its finest. Doug escaped
hypothermia by being in very good physical condition and moving around
while lost. At the same time, the latter prevented his being found by his
companions when they entered the Third Entrance.
A good question is why Doug was left in the first place. Apparently the
idea was to finish the cross-over trip by fetching the extra batteries.
C-rock fall
August-A 1987
Coley Cave, Kentucky
In late August, a small group of cavers was exploring in Coley Cave,
Warren County, Kentucky. At the back of the cave is a constricted lead.
Bob Nadich had climbed about ten feet off the floor to attack this

---------- Page 13 ----------
constriction with a hammer. He apparently was holding himself with his
right hand while hammering when a "huge rock, thought to be part of the
bedrock, moved sideways about an inch," pinning and partly crushing
the fingers of that hand.
Nadich, in extreme pain, wedged a hand sledge into a crack to keep the
rock from moving further while he used a brick hammer to chisel away the
rock he had been grasping for a handhold.
When he got his hand free, "he found the last digit of the small finger
gone and two digits of the ring finger precariously attached.' He had not
been wearing gloves SO the wounds were jammed with mud. He exited
under his own power and rushed to a Nashville hospital. The ring finger
may be saved, but they couldn't clean all the mud out.
Reference: Joe Saunders, excerpt from Personal Communication to Mike
Dyas, September 7, 1987.
Analysis: Nadich was well above the floor and facing into a constriction
SO it would have been very difficult for anyone to assist him. Apparently
the only alternative to him chiseling himself free would have been to use a
hydraulic jack.
B-exhaustion
August-B, 1987
Gargantua Cave, Alberta, Canada
In August of 1987 a group of cavers form Canada, the U.S. and Europe
was at the Crowsnest Pass caving area in Alberta, Canada. Exploration
and survey was carried out in various caves.
As one group exited Gargantua Cave, a caver with an "injured arm"
was unable to climb a cable ladder at the 17 meter drop. A rescue team of
six cavers was assembled at camp and entered Gargantua. A pulley
system was rigged, but when the victim was hoisted, a knot jammed
under an overhang.
The victim was lowered and the pulley system was eliminated; the
victim was raised by a straight pull at a different angle and was raised at
"spectacular speed.' He exited without further difficulty. (Jon Rollins
"1987 Speleofest" Canadian Caver Spring, 1988).
A-rockfall


********** September 8, 1987
Un-named Pit, West Virginia
Shortly after 6 p.m. on September 8, Bill Liebman and Barry
Baumgardner were checking a 60 foot pit near Laneville, West Virginia.
A tree at the edge of the sink was used for a rig point. The rope passed
down a ten foot slope and on down the relatively free drop of the thirteen
foot diameter pit. They had gotten wet from a rainstorm on the hike to the
pit. Both rappelled in but no leads were found so they prepared to exit.
They were getting chilled by this time.
Liebman started up after flipping the rope to a new position. When he
got about ten feet up, he heard the sound of rocks falling. "Without
looking up, I instinctively leaned toward the wall and raised my left arm up
over my head. This shifted his body to the left. He was struck on the
right shoulder by a two to three hundred pound rock, which continued on
to shatter on the floor.
It was several minutes before Liebman could answer his companion's
inquiries. He was soon able to back down the rope, operating his Jumars
with one hand. Baumgardner exited to see if the landowner had a horse
that could be used to hoist the victim. On the surface, Baumgardner got a
space blanket and waterproof jacket and lowered them to Liebman.
There was a horse available, but when the horse tried to pull, the rope
cut into the ground and friction became too great. A call was made to the
local fire department rescue squad; cavers were called also, but put on
standby.
The rescue squad soon arrived; Liebman was hauled up by direct pull,
guiding himself around ledges. He was out by 7:30 p.m. He had suffered
a severely broken shoulder.
486 NSS News: December 1988
References:
1) George Dasher "The Rocking Chair" The West Virginia Caver 5(5)
October 1987, p 11.
2) Barry Baumgardner Personal Communication (Hot Tub) June 30, 1988.
3) Bill Liebman "Accident in a West Virginia Cave" The Explorer
December 1987, p 156-157.
Analysis: One must advise against doing anything with the position of
the rope after one has rappelled. The rappel enables you to clear or clean
the drop, as much as feasible. Once you have cleared it, don't move the
rope to a place you haven't cleared. In other words, if rocks fall when you
ascend, you probably have done something wrong
D-bad air
Fall-A, 1987
Honey Creek Cave, Texas
In May and June of 1987, record-breaking rains fell in the area of
Honey Creek Cave in Texas. This cave is normally a very extensive
horizontal system, with most passage partly filled with water. The heavy
rains sumped nearly every passage. It was mid-July before a trip into the
cave was possible; the lack of air flow while the cave was sumped had
raised carbon dioxide levels. For those who free-dove the remaining
sumps, this was a sufficient problem that no surveying was done.
The water levels were down to normal by August, but bad air plagued
surveyors until the end of 1987, (Peter Sprouse "Honey Creek Cave"
A-caver fall
Fall-B 1987
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
On Saturday afternoon, the weekend of the TAG Fall Cave-In, a group of
cavers was exploring in Tumbling Rock Cave in Alabama. This is a big,
easy, "walking" cave that is very popular. Still, one of the group
managed to fall and break a leg.
One of the group went for help, notifying the Scottsboro-Jackson
County Rescue squad and Sequoia Caverns, where the Cave-In was being
held. The head of Walker County Cave Rescue was at the Cave-In and
informed Scottsboro-Jackson of the manpower and expertise available,
only an hour away. Scottsboro-Jackson declined. The victim was removed
from the cave at around 10 p.m., and flown by helicopten to a hospital in
Huntsville. (Ken Huffines "Cave Rescue Callout" letter to the Editor, NSS
News March 1988, p 55-56).
C-rockfall


********** October 10, 1987
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
On Saturday, October 10, a team of four cavers was surveying in a
newly-discovered room near the Western Borehole in Lechuguilla Cave in
Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico. Mike Goar (28), the lead
tapeman, set a station on a breakdown boulder. When he sat on the edge
of the rock to read the distance of the last traverse leg, the rock rolled
over. Goar slipped off the tipping rock into a crack in the floor and was
pinned there when the rock rolled onto him. A companion, Terry Bolger,
was able to push the boulder over and free Goar. He suffered bruised ribs
but was able to make the long trip out under his own power. (Pat
Kambesis Personal Communication July 1988).
C-equipment failure


********** October 17, 1987
Neff's Canyon Cave, Utah
On Wednesday, October 17, a party of four cavers, Dave Ursin, Jim
Nicholls, Dave Shurtz and Glenn Shurtz, entered Neff's Canyon Cave in
the Wasatch Mountains east of Salt Lake City, Utah. They were
experienced vertical cavers. Neff's is 1170 feet deep and mostly vertical,
with 800 feet of rope drops. It had been left rigged from a trip on October

---------- Page 14 ----------
14. Only the ten foot handline near the entrance had been removed for fear
of rat damage.
Dave and Glenn Shurtz went in first to re-rig the handline, then proceed
down the Great Pit to wait for the other two. The handline, a length of nylon
webbing, was duly rigged to a boulder.
Jim Nicholls was last to go in. He attached his rack to the webbing
handline and gave a tug. It slipped some; after "several more tugs there
seemed to be no more slippage. When he backed over the edge, the
webbing slipped off the boulder. Nicholls fell backwards head over heels
for ten feet, then slid another five feet, coming to a stop at the edge of a
second 15 foot drop.
Nicholls called to Ursin, who returned and secured Nicholls and
determined that he was unhurt except for bruises and lacerations to his
hands.
Ursin free-climbed the drop, re-attached the webbing to the boulder and
added two back-up anchors. He then helped Nicholls out of the cave.
Reference: Dave Shurtz NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pages).
Analysis: Shurtz says: 'The original mistake was made by the original
rigger of the handline by not backing up his anchor. An additional mistake
was made by each successive user for not checking the anchor, and the
last mistake was, when after an obvious warning, Jim (Nicholls) failed to
check the anchor.
I
would add that nylon webbing is a very poor substitute for kernmantle
rope-its abrasion resistance is extremely poor. Any line to be used
repeatedly should be static kernmantle caving rope.
B-losing the way


********** November 7, 1987
Sloan's Valley Cave System, Kentucky
At 1 p.m. on Saturday, November 7, a group of three cavers, Gary
Wahoff, Pete Yalch, and Chris Frank, entered the Screaming Willies
Entrance of Sloan's Valley Cave System. Pulaski County, Kentucky. They
left a note on the Miami Valley Grotto fieldhouse sign-out board that they
intended to do a cross-over, coming out the Garbage Pit Entrance. This is a
two to six hour trip. They had one light source each.
They rappelled the 56 foot, three-drop descent at Screaming Willies,
and entered the Grand Central Spaghetti area, a three-dimensional maze.
They soon became lost. After eight hours of searching they sat down in a
side lead near the White Grotto to wait for help.
At noon the following day cavers on the scene formed three teams to
search for the overdue group. Other cavers in Lexington were put on
standby.
One team entered the Scowling Tom Entrance, headed to the Spaghetti
area and soon located the three missing cavers, only 300 feet from the
Screaming Willies Entrance. They were cold and hungry but otherwise all
right. They were led out the Garbage Pit Entrance 40 minutes later.
References:
1) Doug Stecko NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pages.
2) Doug Stecko ''Cave Rescue in Sloan's Valley" The Cave Cricket
Gazette 13(1) January 1988.
Analysis: These unaffiliated cavers were unfamiliar with this section of
the cave. A lack of experience will commonly lead to an overestimation of
one's abilities, or an underestimation of difficulties to be encountered.
They took ascending gear SO that they could go back out Screaming
Willies but could not find their way back from the maze.
It was noticed late on Saturday that their car was still there and their
rope still in the pit, but a number of cavers were on hand and the
confusion masked the plight of the three until Sunday morning.
D-losing the way


********** November 8, 1987
Sloan's Valley Cave System, Kentucky
On Sunday, November 8. cavers at the Miami Valley Grotto Fieldhouse
at Sloan's Valley Cave in Kentucky discovered that a group of three had
not returned from a cross-over trip from Screaming Willie's to Garbage Pit.
One of the rescue teams that formed was Mark Turner and Randy Hare.
They went into the Minton Hollow Entrance to check out the Big and
Caramel Passages.
When they found no one in their assigned area, they proceeded to the
Grand Central Spaghetti Maze. Unfortunately they got lost and it was
seven or eight hours before they found their way back to the Big Passage
and out the Minton entrance. A second rescue was almost necessary.
(Doug Stecko 'Cave Rescue in Sloan's Valley" The Cave Cricket Gazette
13(1) January 1988).
B-losing the way
November 15-A, 1987
Clarksville (Ward-Gregory) Cave, New York
On the afternoon of Sunday, November 15, a group from the Berkshire
Community College Outing Club was exploring in Clarksville
(Ward-Gregory) Cave in New York State. Two of the group, Steve Link and
Larry Ward, free dove Brinley's Sump. They explored on downstream,
now in the Gregory section of the cave, but were unable to find the
entrance. They returned to the sump but at the pool, they weren't sure of
the route back. They sat down to wait.
When the two didn't reappear by 4 p.m., an agreed-upon time, their
companions went for help, calling the Albany County Sheriff's Office. The
sheriff called cavers and a rescue was initiated.
A team of three cavers entered the Ward's Entrance and arrived at the
sump at 6:15 p.m. A rope was attached to a chert projection at the bottom
of one of the Chutes and one rescuer started through the sump, feet first.
As soon as the rescuer's boot appeared on the other side, the victims
realized the route, grabbed the boot and, one at a time, pulled themselves
through, using the rescuer as their guideline. They were escorted from the
cave at 6:40 p.m. (Thom Engel "Rescue in Clarksville Cave"
Northeastern Caver 18(4) 1987, 94).
D-other (accident waiting to happen)
November 15-B, 1987
Clarksville (Ward-Gregory) Cave, New York
On November 15, a team of three rescuers had just assisted two lost
cavers through Brinley's Sump in Clarksville Cave, Albany County, New
York. They were exiting when, at the Slickenside Block Room, they met
Chris Giordano. He was dressed in a wet suit under flannel shirt and blue
jeans, and had a face mask, no helmet and one 2-AA cell flashlight. His
intention was to go through Brinley's Sump, the Gregory section, and out
the Gregory Entrance, then sumped. The rescuers smelled "alcohol on his
breath. He was aware of the two sumps. After a lengthy discussion, they
persuaded him to turn back. (Thom Engel "Rescue in Clarksville Cave"
Northeastern Caver 18(4) 1987).
B-equipment failure
Winter 1987-88
Cave near Ashcamp, Kentucky
On a Wednesday a group of cavers visited a cave on a cliff near
Ashcamp, Kentucky (six miles southwest of Elkhorn City). They explored
to a 40 foot pit where they attempted to descend with a "cable." Allen
Tackett went down first and was stranded, unharmed, at the bottom when
the cable broke.
At 5 p.m. Tackett's companions went for help and summoned the Pike
County Rescue Squad. Tackett was hauled from the pit unharmed five
hours later. Unfortunately one rescue squad member suffered a broken
kneecap and another a broken ankle in falls on the slippery snow-covered
rocks on the way out of the hollow leading to the cave. (Tricia Miller "Man
trapped in cave escapes unhurt," in newsclipping of "Regional
Roundup, source unspecified).

---------- Page 15 ----------
A-caver fall


********** December 12, 1987
Widow Cave, Oklahoma
At about 11:15 a.m. on Saturday, December 12, a group of nine
entered the Corkscrew Entrance of Widow Cave, Major County, Oklahoma.
After climbing down the 21 foot entrance drop, two started taking photos
while the rest explored on. About 300 feet from the entrance, at about
noon, Janet Gregor slipped on a muddy slope and suffered a painful ankle
injury. It was incapacitating and appeared to be broken.
She was stabilized, with a jacket to lie on and a blanket and space
blanket tent over her with a carbide lamp for warmth. Two Tylenol were
given for pain. The ankle was immobilized with a stiff notebook for a
splint, held in place with masking tape and later with duct tape. One caver
headed for Enid, to get the Grotto's rescue equipment, just in case.
About 1:15 they started carrying her to the entrance drop which was
being rigged with a rope. At the drop she was fitted with a harness; at
2:40 the haul was commenced with cavers free-climbing alongside.
Gregor was out by 3 p.m. and soon on her way to a hospital where X-rays
showed no broken bones. (Bruce Baker NSS Accident Report undated, 3
pages).
AA-drowning (sump dive)


********** December 20, 1987
Waikapala'e Wet Cave, Hawaii
On Sunday, December 20, a group of four people visited Waikapala'e
Wet Cave in Ha'ena, Kauai, Hawaii. This is a lava tube adjacent to the
ocean and partly filled with water. Most of the cave is accessible by
wading but the Blue Room usually requires diving a short sump. During
very dry spells it is sometimes possible to enter this room without diving
but on the 20th the cave was under "normal" conditions.
They entered the tube, some eight to ten feet in diameter with about
three feet of air space, reportedly equipped with snorkels. Leighton Ho
(36) attempted to reach the Blue Room by diving the sump. When he failed
to reappear, his companions left and called the police.
The Kauai Fire Department Rescue One divers recovered the body at
about 9 a.m. Monday.
References:
1) Ed. "Kauai divers recover body of teacher" Honolulu Advertiser
December 22, 1987.
2) Ed. "Man dies in Ha'ena Wet Cave" The Garden Island December 21,
1987, p1.
Analysis: The water was apparently murky, so Ho may have lost his
way. A safety line might have helped.
AA-equipment failure - caver fall


********** December 26, 1987
Copperhead Pit, Indiana
On Saturday, December 26, a group of eight people were in
Harrison-Crawford State Forest, near Wyandotte Cave, looking for caves to
explore.
"We didn't know exactly what we were looking for, but after about an
hour we found this hole that had maybe a 60 foot drop to the first level,
said Kenny Elder, one of the group. He admitted that they had never seen
one "that went straight down." The hole they had found, about two feet
square, was Copperhead Pit, a shaft of about 100 feet depth.
They tied a 30 foot rope to a tree and Christopher Elder (24) started
down, apparently hand-over-hand. He reached a ledge about 20 feet
down, then continued until at about 4:30 p.m. he went off the end of the
rope. He fell about 80 feet, landing on two boulders, wedged across the
pit.
Two companions went to call for help. Others fetched more rope. This
was still too short, but "we got a flashlight to him, and he hugged it.
When we pulled it back up, it had blood all over it, so we knew he was
hurt pretty bad.'
The English and Leavenworth Fire Departments and two Crawford
County ambulance EMT's arrived. Caver rescue teams were put on alert
488 NSS News: December 1988
but the nearest one, from Bloomington, arrived after the evacuation.
A technician was lowered down the shaft to find Elder unconscious and
bleeding, with a slow pulse and low blood pressure. The victim was
stabilized on a backboard and at 7:30 p.m. pulled up. A carry with some
vehicle transport four miles through the woods was necessary to reach a
spot where the helicopter could land. He was flown by helicopter to
Humana Hospital (University of Louisville) where he was pronounced dead
at 9:11 p.m.
References:
1) Carla Harris 'Man, 24, plunges 80 feet to death in cave shaft"
Louisville Courier-JournalMonday, December 28, 1987.
2) L. R. McCarty "Indiana Pit Rescue Callout," unpublished report,
page.
3) Lynne Hansen "Georgetown man dies after falling 90 feet in cave"
Corydon Democrat December 30, 1987, p 1.
Analysis: Doing a 100 foot shaft on a 30 foot rope-and hand-over-hand
as well. How sporting.
CAVE DIVING ACCIDENTS
B-equipment failure


********** December 7, 1985
Orange Cove Sink, Florida
A large group of newly-certified divers went to Orange Cove Sink on
December 7, 1985 to take part in an "apology" dive of the University of
Florida Underwater Education Program due to poor visibility conditions on
several open-water qualification dives they had been on.
They buddied up and entered the water at 10 a.m. An instructor,
Milledge Murphey, paired with a student, Robert Knox. Murphey was
testing a Poseidon 300 regulator which had been rebuilt two weeks before.
He did not bother to add an octopus for this single dive, but he checked to
see that Knox had one.
The water was extremely clear as they descended and at 67 feet,
Murphey signalled that he would like to look just inside the entrance to the
cavern zone. Knox was already using his small handheld light. They
continued down to about 90 feet.
"At this point, Robert was about three meters below me and four
meters behind me, when upon inhaling, I was unpleasantly surprised by a
100% water intake through my mouthpiece."
Not believing he was out of air, he attempted a shallow breath and again
got water. He was now on the verge of a choking cough, nearly gagging
with water in his epiglottis.
He decided that a free ascent with no ability to exhale would be
hazardous, SO he headed for Knox, making the out-of-air signal. When he
reached Knox, he was on the verge of uncontrollable cough and beginning
to "grey-out.
Knox saw the signal as Murphey arrived and removed his primary
second stage and placed it in Murphey's mouth. As Murphey coughed out
the water, Knox picked up his octopus and began breathing it. When
Murphey got control, he signalled "OK" and "UP" and they surfaced
without further incident.
Reference: Milledge Murphey "The 'Apology' Dive: A Near Miss"
Underwater Speleology 14(4) August 1987, p 7.
Analysis: Apparently, after the regulator rebuild, the repair people had
"failed to put a new plastic tie around the mouthpiece/second-stage
orifice junction and, more importantly, (Murphey) hadn't checked the tie
placement when (he) had surface checked the regulator following the
service."
Murphey decided, on the basis of this critical experience, that in
situations like this, one should give away the five foot hose to one in

---------- Page 16 ----------
trouble, retaining the short hose. The best configuration would be a
'5-foot hose with first and second stage mounted on the outside manifold
post with the hose routed under the diver's right arm, around the diver's
neck and into the diver's mouth as the primary.
"The second stage should then be mounted on the inner or center post,
routed over the right shoulder, and held at the base of the wearer's throat
with a rubber neck band. Mounted on the safe-second regulator's first
stage should be inflator hose(s) and pressure gauge, plus the safe second
stage regulator.
This minimizes entanglements when sharing, eliminates excess bungie
cords, and puts the safe second at the throat where it can be accessed
easily.
Lastly, Murphey obtained a "renewed belief in absolute rigid adherence
to all safety considerations" taught in diving "Why would anyone
ever
dive without an octopus-even in open-water ?"
AA-silting
Spring 1987
Unspecified Cave, Mexico
Three divers reportedly entered a cave somewhere in Mexico using two
scooters. The first scooter towed a 13 year old boy who had only five
minutes of SCUBA instruction. Their only lights were the scooter
headlights.
The first scooter apparently got too close to a sand bank and stirred up
silt. The second scooter, with the single diver, saw this and retreated. The
first continued and the divers drowned when their air was exhausted.
Reference: Ed. 'Scooter Fatality in Mexico" Underwater Speleology May
1987.
D-equipment failure


********** April 7, 1987
Castleguard Cave, Alberta, Canada
During the week of April 4-11, a group of cavers was attempting a dive
in
Castleguard Cave in Alberta, Canada. Most of the group acted as
Sherpas, ferrying diving and caving gear in to the sump, 1.1 km into the
cave.
The sump is a rift two by six meters with the water level about 2 meters
below the lip. The near end was a rubble slope leading down to the water.
The visibility in the water looked good as they prepared to dive, but a large
rock was perched precariously over the pool; when it was purposely
dislodged. silt was stirred up and visibility went to nothing.
One diver swam over to a fixed shot-line and followed it down. Visibility
was indeed zero so he came back up, having descended 12 meters.
They waited for an hour for the silt to settle and Keith Sawatsaky went
in. He descended to 14 meters, where a passage seemed to go off.
Visibility was still almost zero, and he turned back. When he did so, the
line-reel jammed and he lost contact with the wall. When he increased his
buoyancy and ascended, he could only hope that he would come up in the
same rift he had descended-he did. (Keith Sawatsky "Diving in
Castleguard" The Canadian Caver Fall, 1987
AA-silting, no guideline, etc.


********** June 13, 1987
Bonnet Spring, Florida
On June 13, two divers, a husband and wife, entered Bonnet Spring,
near Peacock Spring in Florida. In fact, the divers thought they were in
Peacock Spring. Both were open-water certified with no cave diving
training. Almost immediately they stirred up "serious" silt. The wife was
frightened by this and turned back not far in from the entrance, exiting
successfully. The husband continued on, lost his way and died when his
air ran out.
Reference: Ed. ''Open-Water Diver Dies in Bonnet Springs'' Underwater
Speleology 14(4) August 1987, p 4.
Analysis: The body recovery team was Mark Leonard and Ron Menke.
Ron reports that it was "a completely typical, textbook-type open-water
diver cave-diving accident, with all cave diving rules except the depth rule
having been broken.
AA-silting, no guideline, etc.
July 3. 1987
The Elevator Shaft, Oahu, Hawaii
On the third of July a group of four Marines geared up for a dive at the
Elevator Shaft at Sharks Cove on the north coast of Oahu Island, Hawaii.
Lance Corporal Ron Redd wanted to cash a check and waited at a store
until it opened at 9 a.m. The others, Corporal William Sides, Jr. (22),
Corporal Joseph Hennion (22) and Lance Corporal Rickie Will (21),
proceeded to the cove at 8 a.m. Sides had been certified "open-water"
for two years, the others for two months. Their training came at a dive
shop that stressed the dangers of cave or wreck diving.
The Elevator Shaft is an opening to the sea that has at least three lava
tubes leading from it. One leads to a small cove and across this is the
entrance to a longer lava cave complex with a number of side passages.
The three apparently had one tank and regulator each. They swam into
the longer lava tube and proceeded for about 150 to 200 yards, where they
got into difficulty, perhaps from low visibility, or lack of light.
At 11 a.m., Redd arrived at Shark's Cove. He put on his gear and
entered the water. The seas were rough and there was no sign of the
others. He searched the cave entrances until 12:30 p.m. when he exited
the water and returned to the cars. There was no sign that his friends had
been to their vehicles while he had been in the water, so he proceeded to
Aaron's Dive Shop.
Redd returned to the cove with an instructor and searched for another
hour. They found nothing and at 2:30 p.m. they called the Fire Department
Rescue Squad. Divers located the bodies, together, at about 5:30 p.m.
References:
1) AP "Three Marines die while scuba diving through lava tubes" The
Tribune (San Diego) July 4, 1987.
2) N. P. DeCarlo Personal Communication to Mike Dyas, January 19, 1988
(Sketch map of cave).
3) G. L. Cates Investigative Report U. S. Marine Corps, September 18,
1987, 4 pages.
4) C. H. Ellis Investigative Report U. S. Marine Corps, July 23, 1987, 6
pages.
Analysis: Apparently the four were unaware of the complexity of the
caves. In any case they were quite unprepared for a cave dive and broke
all the rules.
A Marine recreational diver and Corporal Redd were the ones to find the
bodies and had to retreat because of low visibility. They followed an old
rope out of the cave.
The group had made a "rudimentary dive plan" at the barracks the
night before, but did not follow it. The Marine Corps investigation also
cited the strong wave surge from the rough seas as contributory. Only one
flashlight was recovered with their equipment. An autopsy showed death
due to drowning.
AA-silting


********** July 21, 1987
Jenkins Creek Cave, Florida
On Tuesday morning, July 21, a group of three teenagers arrived at a
spring in Jenkins Creek, near Weeki Wachee, Florida. Benson Cusmano
and Jason Tuskes (17) proceeded to dive the spring, despite a sign saying
"No Diving.
Cusmano led, carrying the reel laying the guide line. They got about 50
to 60 feet down and 170 feet along the narrow passage when Cusmano
finally became deterred by the silt they were kicking up. Thinking Tuskes
had already turned back, Cusmano retreated, taking in the line. When he
got to the surface, Tuskes was not there.
Apparently Tuskes had lost track of the guide line and became

---------- Page 17 ----------
disoriented in the silt. When his air got down to just a few minutes, he took
off his tank and scratched "I love you Mom, Dad and Christian'' on it with
his dive knife. It was his mother's birthday. His body was recovered by
rescue divers later that afternoon 57 feet down.
References:
1) Ed. "Drowning boy leaves message" Tallahassee Democrat July 24,
1987.
2) Ed. "Doomed teen scrawls note" San Angelo Standard TimesJuly 24,
1987.
3) Dick Donovan "Trapped Diver Scratches Out Farewell Note to Parents''
Weekly World News August 25, 1987.
Analysis: Tuskes had been open water certified since February and
done 100 dives. He was signed up for a cave diving course but apparently
thought to get a head start on it. He was described as "fearless" by his
father. Perhaps "fearless" is not a very good attitude, especially for a
cave diver.
To scratch a farewell note in an asphyxiating situation, a very
unpleasant way to die, must take tremendous presence of mind.
AA-current entrapment


********** September 28, 1987
Blue Springs, Florida
On Tuesday, September 28, two divers, James Thomason (22) and
Joseph Cowart III (25) went diving in Blue Springs, at Blue Springs State
Park, Valusia County, Florida. Cowart had reportedly been certified as a
cave diver a week earlier at Ginnie Springs. He had been diving for a year.
The pair had dropped off three extra tanks at points along the course of
the dive, and Cowart hoped to penetrate deeper and farther than anyone
had done previously. When they began their dive he had 30 minutes of air
in his tank.
When they got 120 feet down, they encountered a powerful current that
pinned Cowart against a rock. His regulator became tangled and he
drowned. Thomason apparently surfaced too fast and was airlifted to
490 NSS News: December 1988
Shands Hospital in Gainesville, where he received decompression
treatment. Cowart's body was recovered the following day by a team from
the Valusia County Sheriff's Office.
Reference: AP "Diver drowns in current at spring mouth' Tallahassee
Democrat Friday, October 2, 1987.
Analysis: The lead body recovery diver, Carl Clifford, noted that the
stashed extra tanks did Cowart no good when he became trapped-he
should have had a spare regulator and tank with him. According to
Clifford, "no one-not even experienced cave divers-should attempt to
dive through the powerful currents of the spring like Cowart did.'
D-equipment failure


********** November 15, 1987
Wild Well, lowa
On Sunday, November 15, a group of cavers did preliminary dives in
Wild Well in lowa. They intended to do short, one-reel (300 foot), solo
dives to look for old lines and other hazards. They each had Y-valve tanks
with an extra tank and regulator, three lights and an extra mask and reel.
Doug Schmuecker proceeded. The water was very clear and he passed
two air-filled rifts and passed what he thought was the end of the old line.
Five minutes had passed when his back tank worked loose and fell.
Schmuecker changed to his long hose and dropped to the bottom.
The water now became silted and the safety line was wrapped around
his regulator. After a few minutes Schmuecker tied off the reel and left it,
following his line out, carrying the loose tank.
Reference: Mike Nelson and Doug Schmuecker "Wild Well Project, lowa"
Underwater Speleology, 15(3) May/June 1988, p 13.
Analysis: Schmuecker says "if you follow all safety rules, you can take
care of a major problem-and end up with only your feelings hurt."

---------- Page 18 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Accident Report Form
Date of Accident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name (s) of person (s)
Age
Sex
Experience
involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving
Accidents" is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
( ) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
(
) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver, weather, equipment. clothing.
etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( ) Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose ccpies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
Time:
State
Zip
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 19 ----------
Lewisbur V24 U.S.A.
BOB & BOB
"Cavers Serving Cavers
Worldwide"
