
---------- Page 1 ----------
American Caving Accidents
2002-2003
September 2005, Part 9

---------- Page 2 ----------
American Caving Accidents
2002-2003
Editor
William O. Putnam
1865 Eagle Summit Court
American Caving Accidents
Lawrenceville GA 30043-6669
aca@caves.org
August 2005
ACA 2002-2003
Review Committee
Richard Blackburn
Features
Diane Cousineau
An Overview of the 2002 and 2003 Incidents
George Dasher
John Ganter
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics
John Gookin
Kris Green
Developing Judgment in Your Armchair
Dave Hughes
2002 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Becky Jones
Buddy Lane
2003 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Anmar Mirza
Stephen Mosberg
2002 and 2003 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Bill Storage
Tim White
2002 and 2003 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Forrest Wilson
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Deadline: The NSS News is distributed the
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
last week of the month preceding the date of
publication. Ads, articles, and announce-
2002 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
ments should be sent to the NSS News, Box
879, Angels Camp, CA 95222 by the 15th of
2003 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
the month, six weeks before the month of
issue (e.g., material for March should be
2002 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
submitted by January 15).
2003 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
The NSS News (ISSN-0027-7010) is
published monthly with the Members Manual
The National Cave Rescue Commission
and American Caving Accidents published
as additional issues by the National
Speleological Society Inc., 2813 Cave Ave.,
Contributing Authors and Photographers
Huntsville AL 35810-4431.
John Gookin
Periodicals Postage Paid at Huntsville, AL
and additional mailing offices.
284 Lincoln Street, Lander WY 82520-2848
gookin@nols.edu
Tel: (256) 852-1300
Fax: (256) 851-9241
Kris Green
Email: nss@caves.org
4544 N Highway 27, LaFayette GA 30728-6789
www.caves.org
krisgreen@earthlink.net
Regular membership in the NSS is $36 per
year. Subscriptions to the NSS News are $23
Jeff Burns
per year; individual copies are $1.50 each.
40 SE Helms Road, Union Grove AL 35175-9607
Copies of American Caving Accidents are
jeffrey.burns@redstone.army.mi
also available from the NSS Bookstore for
$5.00 plus postage. Contact the Huntsville
office for membership applications,
subscriptions, orders, or for replacement of
issues missing or damaged in the mail.
Copyright © 2005
by the National Speleological Society Inc.
All rights reserved. No portion of this
Front Cover
publication may be reproduced without the
written permission of the National
Members of the Chattanooga-Hamilton County Cave and Cliff Team carry volunteer
Speleological Society.
patient Lori Beth Armstrong through Raccoon Mountain Caverns in a mock rescue
Postmaster:
exercise. Photograph Copyright © 2005 Kris Green.
Send address changes to
Back Cover
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Ave.
Students at the 2005 NCRC National Seminar move volunteer patient Pat Seiser past
Huntsville AL 35810-4431
an obstacle in Mike's Wolf Cave during the final mock rescue exercise of the week-
long training seminar. Photograph Copyright © 2005 Jeff Burns.
Volume 63 Number 8, Part 2

---------- Page 3 ----------
An Overview of the 2002 and 2003 Incidents
American Caving Accidents (ACA) is the journal of record
for caving accidents and safety incidents in the United States
and North America. This issue contains reports for incidents
that occurred in 2002 and 2003. Following the custom of
previous issues, the reports have been separated into two
general categories: regular caving and cave diving, and then
further classified by result or outcome and by causes and
contributing factors. The cave diving incidents are grouped
separately, and an overview is presented at the end of this
section.
Since 1994 we have used the category "difficulty on rope,"
to encompass such problems as becoming stuck at the lip of a
pit, clothing or hair caught in the rappel device, jammed
rappel safety, or simply becoming unable to ascend or
descend. Our intent is to better describe these situations, which
might otherwise be lumped under "stuck," "trapped/stranded,"
or perhaps "equipment problem."
In reporting the number of incidents versus NSS
membership totals, only caving incidents involving fatalities,
injury, or aid were included. The reader should also be aware
that the members of the National Speleological Society
constitute only a portion of the population of active cavers.
Further, not all incidents are reported to ACA. These numbers
should not be considered reliable indicators of accident rates
for caving or used to draw conclusions about the relative
degree of risk or danger involved in caving.
Incident Results
Fatalities
On average there are three or four fatal caving accidents in
North America each year. When incidents involving untrained
and inadequately equipped spelunkers are excluded,
the
average drops to one or two fatal accidents per year.
In 2002 there were only two fatalities. Both involved
inexperienced cavers who did not use proper safety
equipment. The first occurred in May at Yo-yo Pit in New
Mexico, when Joseph Lobato attempted to descend a 130-pit
hand-over-hand to retrieve a lost cell phone. The second
occurred in December at Bloomington Cave, Utah, when 17-
year-old Kiley Jaquays lost her footing and fell down a steep
slope in the cave.
There were six fatalities in 2003. In March, a 22-month-
old boy fell into a cave entrance near his house and drowned
in a pool at the bottom. Also in March, a woman was killed
when she fell down a steep slope at the entrance to Gruta del
Río Chontalcuatlán after being struck in the head by a falling
rock.
As discussed in George Dasher's editorial in the June 2003
issue of American Caving Accidents, the danger of water in
caves should not be underestimated. In June, caver Allen
Booth became trapped by rising water and drowned in
Boundary Cave at Carter Caves State Park, Kentucky, after
entering an active stream cave despite rainy conditions. About
In the US, "cavers" generally consider "spelunkers" to be people who have
no real knowledge or understanding of caves and caving safety, but who
decide to enter a cave anyway, usually without proper equipment.
one month later, NSS member Bruce Brewer drowned in
Climax Cave, Georgia, while apparently attempting to free-
dive a sumped passage connecting two rooms in the cave.
In September, long-time caver and NSS member Dick
Graham was killed by a fall in Lori Cori Canyon Cave, a part
of Virginia's Omega System, when his bobbin descender
became detached from the rope shortly after he began his
rappel down a 213-foot pit. Another rappelling accident
resulted in a fatality when Dave Flannell, a BASE jumper with
limited rappelling experience, lost control of his rappel rack
and fell about 400 feet while descending the entrance drop at
Sótano de las Golondrinas in San Luis Potosí, Mexico.
Injury and Aid
Incidents in this category resulted in injury to one or more
people, who then required help in order to exit the cave. While
many of these incidents involved rescue call-outs and outside
assistance, others were resolved by the cavers themselves
without calling for rescue.
There were fifteen incidents in 2002 in which cavers were
injured and required rescue or assistance. Three involved
cavers who were injured and trapped by rockfall or passage
collapse. Another involved a group of cavers attacked by
"killer bees' at Pozo de Gavilán in Nuevo León, Mexico. The
remaining eleven incidents all involved caver falls.
In 2003 there were nine reported incidents in which injured
cavers were rescued or required assistance. One incident
involved a caver injured and trapped by rockfall at Land of the
NSS Membership and
Number of Incidents
Year
Members
Incidents
Only incidents resulting in aid, injury, or fatality are
included. Membership figures include all classes of
membership.

---------- Page 4 ----------
Swirling Mists Cave in Colorado. In Mexico, a low-profile
rescue was successfully executed at Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca,
when a caver injured his knee while crossing a rebelay at a pit
in the cave. Expedition members were well prepared, and
brought in a litter and other rescue equipment from their camp
outside the cave. The remaining seven rescues involved cavers
injured in falls.
Aid, No Injury
There were four reported incidents involving uninjured
cavers who required rescue or assistance in 2002 and fourteen
reported incidents for 2003. Most incidents in this category are
rescues of individuals that cavers often refer to as
"spelunkers." They are typically poorly equipped and
inexperienced, and are often stranded when they break or lose
their flashlights, run out of batteries, descend pits hand-over-
hand, or get lost. Examples in this issue include the February,
2002, rescue at Connies Cave, California, and the March,
2003, rescue at Tiftonia Pit, Tennessee. In both incidents,
individuals with no caving experience or equipment descended
pits hand-over-hand and became stranded when they were
unable to climb back up their rope.
Sometimes, however, even experienced and properly
equipped cavers become ill and need assistance, or become
trapped by rockfall or flooded passage. One such incident
occurred at Trout Cave, West Virginia, in May, 2002, and
involved a caver who was experiencing chest pain and other
symptoms of a heart attack. Another occurred at Cemetery Pit,
Georgia, in January, 2003, when a caver had a seizure while
on rope in the entrance pit.
In December, 2002, a caver became stranded on rope in
Coon Cave, West Virginia, when he was unable to make the
transition from the climbing rope to a traverse line. In similar
incidents in October, 2002 and June, 2003, cavers became
stranded and required assistance at the 137-foot entrance pit in
War Eagle Cave, Alabama, when they were unable to climb
past a flowstone overhang at the lip. A group of cavers
became stranded by flooding in Memorial Day Cave, West
Virginia, in May, 2003, and required assistance to exit the
cave. In August, 2003, a group of Scouts lost in Bear Cave,
Pennsylvania, exited with help from the cave owner's dog.
Injury, No Aid
These incidents resulted in injuries ranging from scrapes
and bruises to sprained ankles and broken legs. In each case,
the victim was able to exit the cave with minimal assistance
from members of the caving party. In 2002 there were six
reported incidents of this type, all resulting from falls. There
were also six reported incidents for 2003. Two were caused by
rockfall and three resulted from caver falls. The remaining
incident occurred when a caver lost his footing while
rappelling over a pit lip and slammed against the wall.
No Consequence
Many of these incidents are of the "near miss" category.
They are included SO that the reader will be aware of the many
things that can go wrong on a caving trip. Some of these
incidents offer good illustrations of effective self-rescue or
small-group rescue.
There were four incidents of this type reported for 2002. In
January, a caver who became ill and passed out during a trip in
Kennamer Cave, Alabama, eventually recovered and left the
cave on his own. On May 10, cavers making a through-trip in
Idaho's Crystal Ice Cave nearly became stranded when they
pulled down their ropes after descending a pit, only to find the
passage leading to the exit blocked by an unexpected amount
of ice and snow. After some searching, they were able to dig
their way through a small gap along one wall.
In two similar incidents at Hell Below Cave, New Mexico
and Sótano de Cepillo, Mexico, cavers on rope climbing out of
a pit discovered that the maillon link used to secure the seat
harness of their climbing system had come unscrewed,
probably due to movement of the rope against the screw gate
during the climb. In each incident, the affected caver was able
to secure the maillon and continue, but felt that other cavers
should be aware of the problem.
Five incidents of this type were reported in 2003. In
February, a caver dropped his ascenders down a pit while on
rappel in Sistema de los Tres Amigos. His rope did not reach
the bottom, but he was resourceful enough to use the end of
his rope to fashion prusik knots and climb out. In April, a
group of cavers was trapped for five hours by flooding in
Onesquethaw Cave, New York, but was able to leave when
the water level dropped. One incident involved a child who
fell into a hole and the other two involved lost cavers who
found their own way out before rescuers arrived at the cave.
Incident Types
Acetelyne Hazard or Explosion
No acetylene-related incidents were reported for 2002 or
2003. It may be that the increasing availability of affordable
high-quality electric headlamps has largely displaced carbide
lights in US caving.
Bad Air
Two of the caving-related incidents reported in this issue
involved bad air. Both were fatalities in abandoned mines,
rather than actual caving accidents, however. Two men died in
June 2002 while exploring Blue Light Mine in California.
They were found in a flooded passage in 10 feet of water, but
rescuers reported that the oxygen level in the mine was only
4%. It was not clear whether the low oxygen level was the
primary cause or just a contributing factor. Bad air was clearly
the cause of a fatality at the Maryland Mine in Idaho in 2003.
In that incident, a man rappelled down a shaft in an abandoned
mine to rescue a dog, but lost consciousness and died before
he could be rescued. For a discussion of bad air in caves see
Bill Mixon's article in the April 2000 ACA and Bill Elliott's
article in the December 1997 ACA.
Caver Fall
Falls remain the leading type of safety incident or accident
in caving, accounting for a large proportion of reported
injuries and rescues. In 2002, for example, 20 out of 34
reported incidents involved falls. Many of the incidents could
have been prevented by the use of a belay. Cavers should
consider using a belay whenever the exposure of a climb or
traverse is greater than a body length. Incidents at Ten Mile
Pit, Carpenter-Swago Cave, Cassell Cave, and Buddha Cave
in 2002, as well as Fort Stanton Cave in 2003 provide ample
illustration.
A belay should be used with cable ladders, as illustrated
yet again by the July, 2002, incident at Dynamited Cave,
Washington, in which a caver lost her balance and fell near the
bottom of a ladder climb.

---------- Page 5 ----------
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics
1986-2003
Result of Incident
Result
87 8889 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
Fatality
Injury and Aid
Aid, no injury
Injury, no aid
No consequence
Total
Incidents Involving
Fatality, Injury, or
Aid
Incident Type
Type
caver fall
trapped/stranded
-
-
-
-
rockfall
lost
equipment problem
difficulty on rope
-
other
hypothermia
exhaustion
flooding
bad air
acetylene
illness
stuck
drowning
Caving-related
Incidents
-
-
-
-
-
Cave Diving Incidents
Result
Fatality (one or more)
Injury and Aid
Aid, no injury
Injury, no aid
No consequence
Total Diving Incidents
-

---------- Page 6 ----------
Cavers also fall on occasion while moving through
"horizontal" passages, accounting for a number of accidents
reported in this issue. The 20 reported incidents in 2002
involving falls include accidents in Bowden Cave, West
Virginia, and Kaumana Cave, Hawaii, both in March. Similar
incidents occurred in Langdons Cave, Indiana, and Morris
Cave, Vermont in July and in Martin Cave, Missouri, and
Cave Mountain Cave, Arkansas, in August.
An unusual incident occurred in Hawaii in September
when a firefighter searching for some missing hunters stepped
onto vegetation covering a 100-foot pit entrance to a lava tube.
He was seriously injured, but survived the fall and eventually
recovered. Cavers injured in falls are often able to exit with
the help of their companions, as demonstrated in incidents at
Howards Waterfall Cave, Georgia, in September, and
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico, in November. Finally, a
caver died from injuries sustained in a fall in Bloomington
Cave, Utah, in December.
Only 14 of the 41 reported incidents for 2003 involved
falls, but three of those incidents resulted in fatalities. As
mentioned above, a visitor to Gruta del Río Chontalcuatlán
died after a fall at the cave entrance. The other two fatal falls
occurred to cavers who were attempting to rappel deep pits.
As noted above, Dick Graham was killed in a fall in Virginia's
Omega System in September when his descender became
detached from the rope, and Dave Flannell died in November
from injuries sustained in a 400-foot fall when he lost control
of his rappel while descending the 1,100-foot entrance shaft of
Sótano de las Golondrinas.
In other 2003 incidents, cavers were injured in falls at
Pettijohns Cave, Georgia, Rocky River Cave, Tennessee, and
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico, but were able to exit with
assistance from their companions. A Boy Scout was rescued
after a fall in Laurel Caverns, Pennsylvania, in April, and
another was rescued from Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico, in
June. Both were injured in falls.
In what may be the first reported incident of its kind, a
Russian BASE jumper broke his leg in Mexico's Sótano de las
Golondrinas in February, 2002, when he delayed opening his
parachute in order to set a record for the longest free-fall in the
1,100-foot pit. He was hauled out with a motorized winch.
Drowning
Drowning incidents are infrequent in "dry caving," but
have occurred when cavers became trapped by flooding or
when they attempted to free-dive through sumped passages.
Both types of incidents are represented in this issue.
There were no drowning incidents reported in 2002, other
than the cave diving incidents discussed below. In caving-
related incidents, however, two men drowned in June while
exploring an abandoned mine in California and another man
drowned in Hawaii when he fell into a blowhole.
In 2003 there were three drowning incidents reported. The
first occurred in March when a toddler fell down the 25-foot
entrance shaft of a small cave near his house and drowned in a
pool at the bottom. Three cavers were confronted by rising
water in Boundary Cave, Kentucky, in June. Two of the men
escaped, but Allen Booth became trapped and drowned when
the passage flooded. The third incident occurred when Bruce
Brewer drowned while apparently trying to free-dive a flooded
passage connecting two rooms in Climax Cave, Georgia.
Equipment Problem
This catch-all category includes rigging failures, slipping
ascenders, light failure, rope failure, and misuse or lack of
equipment. The most notable incidents in this category were
two incidents in 2002 involving maillon screw-links used to
secure seat harnesses coming unscrewed while the cavers
wearing them were climbing out of pits. In one instance, the
caver had accidentally attached the maillon to her harness
backwards, increasing the tendency of the moving rope to
open the screw gate as she climbed. In the other instance, it
was not clear whether or not the maillon was installed in the
preferred right-to-left orientation.
Flooding
There were no reported incidents involving flooding in
2002, but six incidents were reported for 2003. Two of these
involved people who were trapped in sea caves by rising tides
and required rescue. In April, a group of cavers was trapped in
Onesquethaw Cave, New York, for about five hours when a
section of passage flooded, blocking their exit route. In May,
cavers on a survey trip in Memorial Day Cave, West Virginia,
were stranded when heavy rains caused flooding which
delayed their exit. Several men were trapped in a lava tube
cave in Hawaii in November when a cloudburst caused the
stream flowing into the cave to rise rapidly. In each of these
incidents, the stranded cavers were rescued or were able to
leave once water levels dropped.
As mentioned above, a fatality occurred in June, 2003,
when three cavers entered Boundary Cave, Kentucky, on a
rainy day. Allen Booth was unable to make it out of the cave
when the stream flowing into the entrance rose suddenly and
flooded the cave.
The lesson taught by these incidents is simple: pay
attention to the weather conditions. Check the forecast for the
caving area, and be alert for the possibility of flooding. If the
cave is known to flood and you don't have a clear forecast, go
somewhere else. It's just not worth the risk of entrapment,
rescue, media attention, closed caves, injury, or death. For
more on the dangers of water caves, see George Dasher's
editorial in the June 2003 ACA.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is usually a secondary result in the reported
incidents, occurring subsequent to cavers becoming injured,
stranded, or trapped in a cave. There were several incidents
involving lost or stranded cavers in which some of those
rescued required treatment for hypothermia. Remember:
hypothermia can kill you all by itself, but it also impairs your
thinking and judgment, making bigger mistakes more likely.
Illness
A caver fainted due to exhaustion or overexertion during a
January, 2002, trip in Kennamer Cave. In May 2002 a caver
suffered an apparent heart attack in Trout Cave, West
Virginia. He was evacuated from the cave and taken to a
hospital for treatment.
In January, 2003, a caver suffered a seizure while on rope
climbing the 153-foot entrance drop of Cemetery Pit, Georgia.
Another caver helped her get off rope onto a ledge, where she
waited until rescuers arrived and rigged a haul system to pull
her up the drop.
There were no reported incidents for 2002 or 2003 of
histoplasmosis infections due to caving.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Lost
Most of these incidents involved untrained and ill-
equipped cavers with little experience. Many escalate to the
"stranded" category when the batteries run out or flashlights
get broken. When found, lost cavers often require treatment
for hypothermia, sometimes including hospitalization.
The single reported incident of this type for 2002 involved
a poorly-equipped group of inexperienced cavers at Bowden
Cave, West Virginia, in April. There were five reported
incidents involving lost cavers in 2003, including two
incidents at Bear Cave, Pennsylvania, in August and October.
In May, 2003, an experienced caver was lost for about five
hours in Minotaur Cave, Washington, when he entered a
"small cave" solo and subsequently became disoriented and
unable to find the exit. He found his way out just as searchers
were beginning to arrive at the entrance.
Rockfall
As always, rockfall incidents accounted for several serious
accidents and incidents during the reporting period, resulting
in injuries and rescues as well as several cases of entrapment.
There were three reported rockfall incidents for 2002 and five
for 2003.
In February, 2002, a breakdown collapse in Three Falls
Cave, New York, seriously injured two cavers, one of whom
was trapped until rescuers freed him after several hours of
effort. Two teenagers were rescued from Wyoming's Tongue
River Cave in June when a boulder shifted and trapped them
in a small passage. In October a caver was pinned and injured
by rockfall during a dig in Maxwelton Cave, Virginia.
A woman died in the entrance of Mexico's Gruta del Río
Chontalcuatlán in March, 2003, when she fell down a steep
slope after being struck in the head by a rock dislodged by
another visitor climbing above her. Also in March, an
experienced caver was trapped by rockfall in a small crawl in
Womer Cave, Pennsylvania when a rock fell onto his legs as
he crawled beneath a breakdown pile. Two other cavers were
trapped in the passage behind him until he was freed
Another entrapment occurred in June, 2003, during a dig in
Land of the Swirling Mists Cave, Colorado, when a slab of
rock separated from the ceiling and fell onto a caver. His
companion was able to remove enough rocks from around and
underneath him to allow him to wriggle free, but he suffered
broken ribs and other injures.
Also in 2003, cavers were stuck by falling rock in pits at
Nellies Cave, Virginia, and Schlitz Pit, Arkansas, but escaped
with minor injuries. These incidents, while less serious than
the entrapments mentioned above, illustrate the danger of
standing in the fall zone at the bottom of a drop.
Stuck
Despite popular perception, getting stuck is not much of a
hazard for experienced cavers. Most victims are inexperienced
cavers who just need a little coaching and assistance from
their companions. In May, 2003, however, an inexperienced
caver became stuck in a crevice in Buckners Cave, Indiana,
and required rescue. He was freed after 17 hours in the cave
when rescuers managed to remove a small rock from the
crevice, allowing him to slide down to larger passage below.
Trapped/Stranded
This category is used to describe incidents in which the
caver or cavers are prevented from exiting the cave by
rockfall, light failure, lack of equipment, equipment failure, or
other causes. In many of the reported incidents, "spelunkers"
became stranded due to inexperience, inadequate equipment
and/or poor judgment.
There were ten reported incidents of this type in 2002. As
mentioned above, three of these were rockfall entrapment
incidents at Three Falls Cave, New York, Tongue River Cave,
Wyoming, and Maxwelton Cave, West Virginia. An incident
in February at Connies Cave, California, involved cavers
stranded in a pit after descending hand-over-hand. Poorly-
equipped "flashlight cavers" were also rescued from Bowden
Cave, West Virginia, in April and at Casparis Cave,
Pennsylvania, in August when their flashlights failed and they
had no backup lights.
In May, 2002, a group of experienced cavers was briefly
trapped by snow and ice in Crystal Ice Cave, Idaho, during a
pull-down through-trip in the cave. In August, a caver was
rescued from Cemetery Pit, Georgia, after becoming stranded
on a ledge in the 153-foot entrance pit. The remaining
incidents involved experienced cavers stranded on rope at War
Eagle Cave, Alabama, and Coon Cave, West Virginia when
they were unable to maneuver past obstacles on rope.
In 2003, there were fifteen incidents involving trapped or
stranded cavers. Two of these were rockfall entrapments at
Womer Cave and Land of the Swirling Mists Cave and four
were flood entrapments at Onesquethaw Cave, Memorial Day
Cave, Boundary Cave, and a lava tube cave near Kailua,
Hawaii. Two men were rescued from Tiftonia Pit, Tennessee,
in March when they descended the 80-foot pit hand-over-hand
and were unable to climb out. Two boys were rescued from
Midnight Cave, Texas, in a similar incident in April. Also in
April, a group of teenage flashlight cavers was rescued from
Cave Hill Cave, Illinois, after they became lost in the cave.
Two other incidents involved individuals who became
stranded in sea caves and required rescue.
An incident involving two stranded cavers at Hubbards
Cave, Colorado, garnered national attention in August, 2003,
when a man and a woman were found in the cave after being
missing for almost five days. There was some speculation that
the incident was staged, but family members insisted that the
two had been in the cave the entire time, and that the search
had been poorly managed.
Several incidents also occurred in which experienced
cavers became stranded on rope and required assistance or
rescue. In January, 2003, a caver was rescued from Cemetery
Pit, Georgia, after experiencing a seizure while on rope. In a
near-replay of the October, 2002 incident at War Eagle Cave,
Alabama, another caver became stranded at the overhanging
flowstone lip of the 137-foot entrance pit in June. Finally, in
November a caver was unable to climb an eight-foot "nuisance
pit" in Wind Cave, New Mexico, and had to be rescued.
Exhaustion
There were two incidents reported in 2002 in which
exhaustion was a factor. The first occurred in January at
Kennamer Cave, Alabama, when a novice caver attempted to
drag an external-frame backpack through a 500-foot crawl in
the cave. The other took place at Cemetery Pit, Georgia, when
novice cavers became exhausted and stranded while trying to
climb the 153-foot entrance pit using prusik knots. One
reported incident involving exhaustion occurred in 2003 when

---------- Page 8 ----------
a caver failed to secure her seat harness properly, allowing it
to slip down around her knees as she struggled to climb a
small pit in Wind Cave, New Mexico. When she became
exhausted and lost sensation in her lower legs, her companions
called for rescue.
Several incidents have occurred in recent years involving
cavers who became exhausted while climbing, either on rope
or on cable ladders. This type of incident is potentially fatal
due to the rapid onset of harness-induced pathology (also
known as "harness-hang syndrome" or "suspension trauma").
Studies have shown that an immobile caver hanging on rope
can lose consciousness in a matter of minutes, with death
occurring soon after.
A number of articles on the subject are now available on
the Internet and can be found with any search engine. A 2002
report prepared by Paul Seddon for the British Health and
Safety Executive provides the most comprehensive review of
research and literature on the subject published to date.2
Additional reports and information may be found in the
Internet by searching for the terms "suspension trauma,"
"harness-hang syndrome," and "harness pathology."
The findings of the studies are quite serious: an exhausted
or hypothermic caver left suspended can lose consciousness
and die in a matter of minutes. Learn how to get yourself or
another caver off rope with a change-over or pick-off.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder
This category includes cavers who become stranded on
rope and require assistance, or who experience significant
difficulties and require assistance to complete their ascent or
descent. Five such incidents were reported in 2002. One
involved novice cavers attempting to use prusik knots to climb
153-foot Cemetery Pit. Another involved an experienced caver
in Cassell Cave, West Virginia, who was attempting a change-
over but failed to tie off his rappel device before removing his
safety ascender. He broke his leg in the resulting fall.
Possibly the most frightening incident of this type was the
"killer bee" attack at Pozo de Gavilán in June, 2002, when
cavers climbing the 285-foot entrance pit were attacked and
seriously injured after disturbing a colony of Africanized bees.
The two remaining incidents occurred at War Eagle Cave,
Alabama, and Coon Cave, West Virginia, when cavers were
unable to negotiate past obstacles while ascending.
There were five reported incidents involving cavers who
had difficulty on rope in 2003. In February, a resourceful
caver performed a self-rescue after he dropped his ascenders
down a pit while passing a rebelay on rappel in Sistema de los
Tres Amigos. Another rebelay incident occurred a few days
later when a caver injured his knee while crossing a rebelay in
Cueva Cheve. In May, a caver was injured when he lost his
footing and slammed into the wall while rappelling over the
lip of Fountain Pit in Alabama. Also in Alabama, another
caver became stranded at the overhanging lip in War Eagle
Cave in June, requiring assistance. The final incident involved
a caver who failed to secure her seat harness properly and was
unable to climb a small pit in Wind Cave, New Mexico.
Some of the cavers involved in these incidents were
relatively inexperienced and did not know how to use their
gear. Others were experienced cavers who were simply out of
2 http://www.hse.gov.uk/research/crr_pdf/2002/crr02451.pdf
practice or out of shape. Some were unable to deal with
situations such as crossing the lip of a pit with weight on the
rope below, crossing an undercut or overhanging lip, changing
from rappel to ascent and vice versa, or climbing a cable
ladder. Clearly, competent cavers must master their systems
and know how their equipment works. With practice, skilled
cavers can perform a change-over in less than 60 seconds.
Spend some time practicing; it could save your life.
Other
This catch-all category includes cars driven into sinkholes,
cuts by sharp rocks, dislocated shoulders, twisted ankles,
animal attacks, and other incidents not covered above.
Cave Diving Incidents
In 2002, there were four reported cave diving incidents, all
of which occurred in Florida, at Little River Spring, Devils
Ear Spring, Bat Colon Cave, and Orange Grove Sink. Three of
the incidents resulted in single fatalities, and one resulted in
the surprising rescue of a stranded diver at Bat Colon Cave.
The three fatalities all involved experienced and certified cave
divers who lost consciousness while under water. The diver
rescued from Bat Colon Cave was not cave-certified.
In a caving-related accident in February, diver Dale Fisher
drowned while exploring a flooded mine in Pickens County,
Georgia. He was using cave diving equipment and techniques,
but was not a certified cave diver. The incident involved
several days of searching before his body was recovered.
News reports referred to the abandoned mine as a cave or
cavern.
Five cave diving incidents were reported in 2003. Three
took place in Florida, with one fatality at Cow Spring and two
at Little River Spring. The Cow Spring fatality appears to have
resulted from a loss of consciousness during the dive. The
victim was a certified cave diver. One of the Little River
Spring fatalities occurred when a diver collapsed and died,
possibly due to an embolism, shortly after exiting the cave and
leaving the water. The other occurred when a diver lost the
guideline in silted conditions. Both victims were also certified
cave divers.
One incident, also a fatality, occurred at Roubidoux Spring
in Missouri when a diver ran out of air and became separated
from his companions while leaving the cave. The victim was a
certified cave diver. Another incident resulted in two fatalities
at Ocean Blue Hole, near Andros Island in the Bahamas, when
two open-water divers failed to return from their dive.
Caving-related Incidents
Once again we have a curious assortment of caving-related
incidents, including bodies found in caves, people trapped,
drowned, or asphyxiated in abandoned mines, and cars driven
into sinkholes.
In 2002 there were nine reported caving-related incidents.
The first occurred in February at State Trooper Cave,
Kentucky, when a section of road collapsed into the cave,
swallowing a pickup truck. The second was the diving fatality
in Pickens Cove Mine, described above.
In April, three boys were rescued after being trapped in a
mine in Arkansas. The boys were digging for treasure in an
abandoned lead mine when the passage collapsed behind
them, blocking their exit.
(Continued on page 9.)

---------- Page 9 ----------
Developing Judgment in Your Armchair
John Gookin
"This is the real core of everything I have to teach, be it in the wilderness or in a book. Judgment. I define judgment as the ability to
relate a total experience to a specific activity. Learning judgment, assessing priorities, is as important as perfecting techniques; in fact
the teaching of techniques (without commensurate judgment) can be dangerous. Paul Petzoldt, The Wilderness Handbook
How do we learn judgment? Experience alone doesn't
develop judgment; careful reflection on experience does. One
way to look at it is that when we reflect on experiences, we
make generalizations that help us to better predict what might
happen
in similar situations. Eventually, we have a somewhat
similar experience, reflect on the outcome, and fine tune our
judgment. As we have more experiences, we repeat the cycle
of experience, reflection, and prediction. Because each
situation is unique, it isn't enough to just learn a system of
rules. We need to intentionally learn from our experiences.
Better yet, we can intentionally learn from the experiences of
others.
Expertise Depends on Experience
Competence at using judgment comes in different levels. A
"competent" caver shows wisdom regarding general caving
skills and performs with more proficiency in his or her own
specialized skill areas. Table 1, below, is a matrix that helps
look at levels of expertise. It shows how people make
decisions and how peer coaching can help them learn to make
better decisions.
Note that in the table, people at different levels are
learning vastly different things, but their ability to learn from
experience is key to further development at any stage. This
edition of ACA is riddled with lessons being learned by both
novices and experts.
Judgment can be general. We need to assume that new
cavers are novices in the world of outdoor judgment until they
prove otherwise. Some people begin caving with more
"common sense" than others. Novices need some basic rules
to begin with, and they want to be told what to do This gets
them started but doesn't set them up with the ability to cave
safely in different caves or even in the same cave when the
water level is different.
New cavers also need to not learn dogma. When we teach
dogmatically, we are providing simple rules that only work in
identical situations. An example of being dogmatic is training
people using superlatives like always and never. A non-
dogmatic approach is to both tell them what the general
guidelines are and to explain to them at least one reason why
each guideline is in place. This "one reason why" level of
understanding is important. If you can't teach people one
Novice
Advanced Beginner
Unconsciously Incompetent
Consciously Incompetent
at this Skill
Ability to make judgment
Aware of what they don't
decisions: Don't know what
know. Ask for help making
they don't know. Can't make
decisions.
judgment decisions.
Coaching Suggestions: Need
Need coached experience and
basic instruction and directed
instruction in integration.
experience.
Table 1 - Levels of Expertise
reason why, you are either teaching too much, or you lack the
background to be a strong teacher. Dogma doesn't set
newcomers up to make wise decisions later. More importantly,
it doesn't train new cavers to think for themselves. The bottom
line is that situational judgment is what teaches people to think
for themselves.
Judgment can also be specific to different skills areas. An
example of expertise being specific rather than general is the
classic case of the BASE jumpers (19Nov03) who rapped into
Golondrinas. Their gear choices alone portray them as novice
cavers, but they may actually be experts at BASE jumping.
Normal Accidents
A "normal accident" is one in which a chain of seemingly
small errors results in catastrophic failure. 4 Contributing
factors might include leaving late, forgetting some gear, being
hung-over, bringing a novice along who slows everyone
down, or twisting your ankle during a trip. Alone, these factors
aren't disastrous. But sometimes factors can be "tightly
coupled" to other factors. If you go alpine caving and bring a
slowpoke along, the slow speed can result in others getting
cold and tired, which makes them more prone to errors in
judgment. Some caving trips are more tightly coupled systems
and don't tolerate these small errors. This edition of ACA is
riddled with normal accidents that involve numerous small
problems that contributed to a disaster. Examples include the
September 21, 2002 accident at Cassell Cave, the September
27, 2003 fatality in the Omega System, and the August 23,
2003 diving fatality at Roubidoux Spring.
Loosely coupled systems have more flexibility. These
caving trips have many of the same problems we see in normal
accidents, but the problems remain minor because they don't
trigger a linear chain of other problems. As we become more
expert at caving, we develop a knack for determining what
errors are tolerable, and what errors aren't. The Caving Risk
Assessment Grid in the December, 1997, ACA acknowledges
many of the specific hazards in more dangerous caves, but
more hazardous caves are also more prone to small problems
cascading into disasters because of direct linear affects. For
example if you have problems with your vertical system in a
bad air cave, it is more significant than having the same
problem in a cave with good air.
Competent
Proficient to Expert
Consciously Competent
Subconsciously Competent
Competent, but correct actions
Can perform well without
are very deliberate. Need help
much thought about it.
with occasional decisions.
Need both coached experience
Need to learn from and
and uncoached experience.
contribute to collective global
wisdom.

---------- Page 10 ----------
Risk Analysis
Cavers can learn how to use judgment sooner, and develop
a set of language tools for discussing judgment, by learning
about possibility/risk analysis.
Cavers need to learn that sometimes it is okay to take risks,
but only if the likelihood of a serious accident is very low.
Charles "Reb" Gregg LLB uses the model shown in Table 2 as
a simple tool for keeping an eye on both probability and
severity of consequences in risk management.
possibility of
low consequences
high consequences
accident
of risk
of risk
low
OK
Stop?
high
OK?
STOP!
Table 2 - Accident Likelihood VS. Severity of Consequence
Managing Risks by Probability and Severity
Knowing that things can and do go wrong is part of good
judgment. If we wanted to be "safe" we would stay home, but
we each have a certain tolerance for risk. This tolerance for
risk shows up in how carefully we drive our cars, our lifestyle
choices, and every aspect of our lives.
When we get a new "safety device" we (collectively) tend
to take other risks because we feel the new device allows us to
cut other corners. An example is the addition of anti-lock
brakes to cars. The initial change was that drivers of these cars
had an increased mortality rate because they drove more
aggressively. They thought they were taking the same risk as
before, but people thought ABS brakes were better than they
actually were. So initially, the mortality rate went up, and now
it is back down to what the rate is for non-ABS cars. 5
With all of the advances in automotive technology, the
mortality rate, when corrected for drivers and miles, hasn't
changed since the Model T. If you look through the equipment
that appears in this edition of ACA, equipment choice is
Acknowledgments
Once again, we are all indebted to the people who have contributed reports for this issue. Their willingness to share their experiences
makes ACA a valuable resource for all cavers. Several notable correspondents have contributed a substantial portion of the material for
these reports. They include: Richard Breisch, George Dasher, Scott Fee, Bill Halliday, Cindy Heazlit, Buddy Lane, Chuck Porter, and
Bill Torode. Many valuable comments and suggestions were provided by reviewers Richard Blackburn, Diane Cousineau, George
Dasher, John Ganter, John Gookin, Kris Green, Dave Hughes, Becky Jones, Buddy Lane, Anmar Mirza, Stephen Mosberg, Bill
Storage, Tim White and Forrest Wilson. Proofreading assistance was provided by Kris Green, Dave Hughes, and Laura Putnam.
(Caving-related Incidents - Continued from page 7.)
Also in April, an intoxicated spelunker broke his leg on the
trail to the Sinks of Roundstone in Kentucky. In June, two
men drowned while exploring an abandoned mine in
California. It was not clear whether they tried to free-dive a
flooded passage, or were overcome by bad air.
An 18-year old man was killed in June when he was
washed into a blowhole at a sea cave in Hawaii. The man was
reported to have ignored signs and warnings from onlookers in
order to stand atop the blowhole. An unidentified man was
killed when a "sand cave" collapsed around him at a
California beach. Finally, there were two reports of bodies
discovered in caves: one in Hannibal, Missouri and the other
in Limestone County, Alabama. In both cases, the individuals
seldom as important as how people used that equipment, with
a couple of notable exceptions.
Learning From the Mistakes of Others
Reading ACA is an excellent way for us all to improve our
judgment, and we can do it from our armchairs. When I began
SAR work, I tended to criticize every victim as a yahoo.
Today I almost always relate to the accident victim and can
understand why they did what they did because I have SO often
made a similar decision but gotten away with it.
We learn our most powerful lessons from our own
experiences, but we can still learn vicariously from reading
about the experiences of others. Indeed, I feel we have an
ethical obligation to help all cavers learn from the collective
wisdom of the caving community.
Judgment
The best way to learn judgment is the best way to learn
anything. Just keep doing all of these things:
Seek knowledge via formal education, reading and
networking with others.
Use mentors and coaches.
Practice, practice, & practice, learning from each
experience by reflecting and predicting.
Maintain a personalized self-development plan based on
feedback you get from nature and from others.
References
1) Petzoldt, P. 1974. The Wilderness Handbook. W.W.
Norton & Co., Inc.
2) Priest, S. 1997. Effective Leadership In Adventure
Programming. Human Kinetics.
3) Dreyfus, Stuart E. & Dreyfus, Hubert L. 1986. Mind Over
Machine. Blackwell Publishers.
4) Perrow, C. 1999. The Normal Accident. Princeton
University Press.
5) Wilde, G. 2001. Target Risk 2. PDE Publications.
had been missing for several days before being discovered in a
cave.
There were four caving-related incidents reported in 2003.
In May, an Idaho man died when he rappelled down a shaft in
an abandoned mine and was overcome by bad air at the
bottom. In July, a man walking on the beach discovered a
body in a sea cave near San Diego, California.
Two reported incidents involved experienced cavers hiking
from or searching for caves. A caver participating in an
expedition on Coronation Island, Alaska, injured his eye when
he fell while hiking back to camp from a cave. In December, a
ridgewalking caver was briefly trapped by rockfall when the
walls of a sinkhole he was checking collapsed on him as he
climbed out.

---------- Page 11 ----------
2002 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
35 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January
Kennamer Cave
Alabama
February 25
Connies Cave
California
February 27
Three Falls Cave
New York
February
Sótano de las Golondrinas
San Luis Potosí,
Mexico
March 17
Bowden Cave
West Virginia
March 20
Ten Mile Pit
Tennessee
March 30
Kaumana Cave
Hawaii
April 7
Bowden Cave
West Virginia
April 18
Hell Below Cave
New Mexico
April 19
Carpenter-Swago Cave
West Virginia
April 20
Cassell Cave
West Virginia
May 10
Crystal Ice Cave
Idaho
May 12
Trout Cave
West Virginia
May 16
Yo-yo Pit
New Mexico
May 27
Fault Cave
Colorado
June 2
Tongue River Cave
Wyoming
June 9
Pozo de Gavilán
Nuevo León,
Mexico
July 6
Dynamited Cave
Washington
July 9
Langdons Cave
Indiana
July
Morris Cave
Vermont
August 10
Martin Cave
Missouri
August 11
Cave Mountain Cave
Arkansas
August 17
Cemetery Pit
Georgia
August 25
Casparis Cave
Pennsylvania
September 11
unnamed lava tube
Hawaii
September 16
Sótano de Cepillo
San Luis Potosí,
Mexico
September 21
Cassell Cave
West Virginia
September 28
Howards Waterfall Cave
Georgia
October 1
Maxwelton Cave
West Virginia
October 6
Buddha Cave
Indiana
October 12
War Eagle Cave
Alabama
November 15
Tower Cave
Colorado
November 24
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
December 14
Coon Cave
West Virginia
December 24
Bloomington Cave
Utah
Previously Unreported Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
August 12, 2001 Hopkins Chocolate Cave
California
Result
Incident Type
no consequence
illness, exhaustion, lost consciousness
aid, no injury
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
rockfall entrapment
injury and aid
caver fall, BASE jumping
injury and aid
caver fall, hypothermia
injury and aid
caver fall, climbing without belay
injury and aid
caver fall, dislocated shoulder
aid, no injury
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
no consequence
equipment problem, maillon opened
injury, no aid
caver fall, climbing without belay
injury, no aid
caver fall, climbing without belay
no consequence
stranded, passage blocked during pull-
down
aid, no injury
illness, heart attack
fatality
caver fall, inadequate equipment
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
rockfall entrapment
injury and aid
difficulty on rope, killer bee attack
injury and aid
caver fall, cable ladder, no belay
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
stranded, exhaustion, difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
stranded, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall, fell into hidden pit entrance
no consequence
equipment problem, maillon opened
injury and aid
caver fall, difficulty on rope
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
rockfall entrapment
injury and aid
caver fall, climbing without belay
aid, no injury
stranded, difficulty on rope
injury, no aid
caver fall, climbing without belay
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded, difficulty on rope
fatality
caver fall
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
caver fall, inadequate equipment

---------- Page 12 ----------
2003 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
40 caving incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 1
unspecified cave, Estill County
Kentucky
January 11
Tower Cave
Colorado
January 18
Cemetery Pit
Georgia
February 1
Pettijohns Cave
Georgia
February 20
Sistema de los Tres Amigos
Oaxaca, Mexico
February
Cueva Cheve
Oaxaca, Mexico
March 4
unnamed cave near Collegedale
Tennessee
March 9
Gruta del Río Chontalcuatlán
Guerrero,
Mexico
March 22
Sinks of the Roundstone
Kentucky
March 23
Tiftonia Pit
Tennessee
March 29
Womer Cave
Pennsylvania
April 15
Midnight Cave
Texas
April 26
Laurel Caverns
Pennsylvania
April 28
Cave Hill Cave
Illinois
April 28
Onesquethaw Cave
New York
May 10
Memorial Day Cave
West Virginia
May 15
Fountain Pit
Alabama
May 17
Buckners Cave
Indiana
May 19
Ice cave near Kalispell
Montana
May 25
Minotaur Cave
Washington
May 25
Tongue River Cave
Wyoming
May 26
Two Door Cave
Hawaii
June 3
Lighthouse Cave
California
June 5
Fort Stanton Cave
New Mexico
June 14
Land of the Swirling Mists Cave
Colorado
June 16
Boundary Cave
Kentucky
June 21
War Eagle Cave
Alabama
June 28
Rocky River Cave
Tennessee
July 3
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
July 13
Climax Cave
Georgia
August 19
Bear Cave
Pennsylvania
August 24
Hubbards Cave
Colorado
September 27
Omega System
Virginia
September 27
Nellies Cave
Virginia
October 25
Bear Cave
Pennsylvania
November 17
unspecified lava tube near Kailua
Hawaii
November 19
Sótano de las Golondrinas
San Luis Potosí,
Mexico
November 29
Wind Cave
New Mexico
December 18
Hawk Hole
New Mexico
December 31
Schlitz Pit
Arkansas
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
caver fall, broken leg, hypothermia
injury, no aid
caver fall, climbing without belay,
inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
stranded on rope, illness
no consequence
caver fall
no consequence
difficulty on rope, dropped ascenders
injury and aid
difficulty on rope
fatality
child fell into cave and drowned
fatality
rockfall, caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
rockfall entrapment
aid, no injury
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
lost, stranded, hypothermia, inadequate
equipment
no consequence
flood entrapment
aid, no injury
flood entrapment
injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
stuck, hypothermia
injury and aid
caver fall, inadequate equipment
no consequence
lost
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded in sea cave
aid, no injury
stranded in sea cave
injury and aid
caver fall, climbing without belay
injury and aid
rockfall entrapment
fatality
flood entrapment
aid, no injury
stranded, difficulty on rope
injury and aid
caver fall, broken leg
injury, no aid
caver fall
fatality
drowned while free-diving sump
aid, no injury
lost
aid, no injury
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
fatality
caver fall, rappel device came off rope
injury, no aid
rockfall
no consequence
lost, inadequate equipment
aid, no injury
flood entrapment
fatality
caver fall, lost control on rappel
aid, no injury
stranded in pit, difficulty on rope
injury and aid
caver fall, descending hand-over-hand
injury, no aid
rockfall

---------- Page 13 ----------
2002 and 2003 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
2002 Diving Incidents
4 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
February 16
Little River Spring
Florida
March 9
Devils Ear Spring
Florida
June 15
Bat Colon Cave
Florida
November 8
Orange Grove Sink
Florida
2003 Diving Incidents
5 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
January 1
Ocean Blue Hole
Bahamas
May 23
Cow Spring
Florida
August 9
Little River Spring
Florida
August 23
Roubidoux Spring Cave
Missouri
November 26
Little River Spring
Florida
2002 and 2003 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
2002 Incidents
9 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
February 25
State Trooper Cave
Kentucky
February 26
Cove Mine, Pickens County
Georgia
April 4
unspecified cave near Hannibal
Missouri
April 7
Sinks of Roundstone
Kentucky
April 8
abandoned lead mine
Arkansas
June 23
Blue Light Mine
California
June 30
Halona Blowhole
Hawaii
July 17
unnamed sand cave
California
August 18
unspecified cave near Athens
Alabama
2003 Incidents
4 incidents reported
Date
Cave
Location
May 26
Maryland Mine
Idaho
June 30
Deer Bone Cave
Alaska
July 9
unnamed sea cave at Sunset Cliffs
California
December 20
unnamed sink, Blount County
Alabama
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
Result
Incident Type
fatality
seizure, cause unknown
fatality
lost consciousness, cause unknown
aid, no injury
siltation, lost guideline, stranded
fatality
lost consciousness, heart attack
Result
Incident Type
two fatalities
cause unknown
fatality
lost consciousness, cause unknown
fatality
cause unknown
fatality
out of air
fatality
siltation, out of air
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
road collapsed into cave
fatality
drowned diving in abandoned mine
no consequence
body found in cave
injury and aid
caver fall outside cave
aid, no injury
rockfall entrapment
two fatalities
drowned free-diving sumped passage
fatality
fell into blowhole and drowned
fatality
passage collapsed
no consequence
body found in cave
Result
Incident Type
fatality
hypoxia, bad air in mine shaft
injury, no aid
caver fall while hiking back from cave
no consequence
body found in sea cave
injury and aid
rockfall entrapment while digging

---------- Page 14 ----------
Previously Unreported Incidents


********** 12 August 2001
Hopkins Chocolate Cave, California
caver fall, inadequate equipment
Joseph Huang (49) was visiting Lava Beds National
Monument with his family. Using hand-held flashlights, they
entered Hopkins Chocolate Cave. Mr. Huang was carrying a
young child in one arm and a flashlight in his other hand when
he lost his balance on the uneven floor and fell, breaking his
leg just above the ankle.
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
January
Kennamer Cave, Alabama
illness, exhaustion, lost consciousness
Tommy Royston, Will Marsh, Joe Glotzbach, and another
caver entered the Orgy Entrance of Kennamer Cave at about
10:30 a.m. The Orgy Entrance is the lower entrance to the
system, and the cavers planned to traverse the cave and exit
via an upper entrance. The initial section of the cave inside the
lower entrance is a long crawl with several pools. Glotzbach, a
novice caver, was carrying his gear in an external frame
backpack.
After about 500 feet of crawling, Glotzbach suddenly
passed out. He regained consciousness very quickly, and was
given a granola bar to eat. Royston decided to abort the trip,
and led the way back out the lower entrance. The group exited
at about 11:30 a.m.
Will Marsh, "January Grotto trip to Kennamer," Huntsville
Grotto News, v44n3, March 2002.
Comments: Glotzbach was new to caving. He had reportedly
just gotten off work and had nothing to eat before starting the
trip. External frame backpacks are not appropriate for most
caves.


********** 25 February
Connies Cave, California
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
Connies Cave is a small marble cave with two entrances,
one of which requires a rappel. The cave is well-known in the
area and frequently visited. At about 3:00 p.m., a party of
inexperienced cavers including two men (both 20) and one
woman (19) entered the lower entrance of the cave equipped
with hand-held flashlights and a seventy-five foot rope. They
had no rappelling or climbing equipment and were not
wearing helmets. After crawling through about ten feet of
small passage, they came to a steep 50-foot-long slope. They
tied the rope around a boulder with a makeshift knot, tied
overhand loops in the rope at intervals, and used the rope as a
handline to descend the slope.
At the bottom, the two men spent some time exploring
passages off the main room. When they attempted to climb
Members of his family left the cave and notified park
personnel at the Visitors Center. Park rangers and EMS
personnel were dispatched to the cave, where they located Mr.
Huang and splinted his ankle. He was then placed in a litter
and carried from the cave to a waiting ambulance.
Matthew Reece, Incident report, 14 May 2002.
Comments: Reece reports that Huang was wearing tennis
shoes, as do most visitors to the Monument. Sturdy boots with
lug soles and ankle support are more appropriate for caving.
back up the slope, the woman had some difficulty. After
several attempts, she became tired and frightened and was
unable to make the climb. One of the males climbed out to go
for help. He hiked to the public road and flagged down a
passing sheriff's deputy, who reported the situation.
The sheriff's department search and rescue team was
dispatched, and arrived at the cave about 30 minutes later.
They rigged a rope and lowered a rescuer into the room. He
provided the female with a harness, helmet, and light, and then
assisted as she was hauled up the slope. Everyone left the cave
without further difficulty.
Greg Francek, Incident report, 19 February 2003.
Comments: Francek reports that a similar rescue occurred at
the cave some years earlier, but does not provide the date of
that incident.


********** 27 February
Three Falls Cave, New York
rockfall entrapment
Sean Greg (26), Raymond Polansky (23), and Liz Gonzola
entered Three Falls Cave at about 8:00 p.m. Wednesday
evening to do some exploring and look for bats. Greg and
Polansky were soldiers stationed at nearby Fort Drum, and
Gonzola was a resident of Watertown. The cave is privately
owned and is posted. The entry was illegal due to the presence
of hibernating Indiana bats in the cave. Gonzola, who had
been caving for about two years, had told the others about the
bats, piquing their interest.
After spending about three hours and seeing "a couple of
thousand bats," they came to a small opening in some
breakdown. Greg, who was the largest of the three, ignored the
others' advice and tried to squeeze through. As he did so,
rocks collapsed from above, pinning Greg and Gonzola.
Polansky was able to free Gonzola by lifting the rock that had
landed on her arm, but Greg was trapped by rocks too large for
him to move. Gonzola's arm was broken, and Greg suffered
internal injuries, two broken legs, and a fractured pelvis.
Polansky stayed with Greg and tried to help his friend
while Gonzola went for help. Despite her injury, she made her
way out of the cave and went to a nearby house for help. She
returned to the cave with state trooper Scott Carr. She tried to

---------- Page 15 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
lead Carr back to the accident site, but her flashlight went out,
and they were forced to exit and wait for other rescuers to
arrive.
The unstable rocks had fallen on Greg's chest and legs.
The largest boulder, later estimated to weigh 650-800 pounds,
was pressing on his chest and pelvis. He began to have
difficulty breathing, and Polansky did what he could to help
his friend. He wedged rocks under the boulder, and braced it
with his back and legs, shifting the weight from one leg to the
other as he waited for help to arrive.
When rescuers arrived, they were able to shift and stabilize
the boulder, relieving the pressure on Greg's chest and legs.
They spent several hours digging and moving rocks. Volunteer
firemen, a physician, and additional personnel and equipment
from Fort Drum arrived to support the efforts, which
continued throughout the night. Air bags were used to lift and
support the rock, which was eventually moved aside enough to
free Greg. He was carried from the cave, unconscious and in a
litter, at about 10:30 a.m. Thursday and flown by helicopter to
a hospital for treatment. He was later reported to be in stable
condition.
Chuck Porter, "Spelunkers injured in Watertown cave
accident, Northeastern Caver, June 2002.
Comments: Porter's report notes that agencies responding to
the incident included seven fire departments, three ambulance
services, two search and rescue teams, the sheriff's
department, and the state patrol. An urban search and rescue
team from Albany was en route with two 18-wheelers full of
equipment but was turned back when the rescue was
completed. A county official estimated the cost of the rescue
at $60,000 to $80,000. He also writes that none of the rescuers
had been in a cave before. Albany-area cavers heard of the
incident Thursday morning and were preparing to go to the
cave when they received word that Greg had been freed and
was on the way out. Porter also reports that some of the
agencies involved later contacted NCRC about obtaining
training in cave rescue.
February
Sótano de las Golondrinas, SLP, Mexico
caver fall, BASE jumping
A member of a Russian group engaged in BASE jumping
the 1,100-foot entrance pit of Sótano de las Golondrinas was
injured when he struck the bottom of the pit while trying to set
a record for the longest delay before opening his parachute.
Jumpers typically open their parachutes after four to six
seconds of free fall. He achieved his goal, but broke his leg
upon impact when his parachute did not have time to deploy
fully. He was hauled from the pit using the group's motorized
winch, and taken to a hospital for treatment.
Peter Sprouse and Jerry Fant, "Sótano de las Golondrinas,'
Caves of the Golondrinas Area, Association for Mexican Cave
Studies, Bulletin 10, 2002, p. 28.
Comments: The term BASE is an acronym for Buildings,
Antennas, Spans, and Earth. BASE jumpers parachute off of
fixed objects including buildings, bridges, antenna towers,
cliffs, and now into pits. BASE jumping at Golondrinas was
inaugurated in 1995. An earlier jump into the pit was made
from a hovering helicopter in 1993. This was the first known
injury to a jumper at the pit.


********** 17 March
Bowden Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, hypothermia
A Boy Scout (11) was exploring the cave with his troop
when he fell near the entrance to the Watercourse. Out of
concern that the boy might be seriously injured, the trip leader
sent for help and did not allow the boy to move. While waiting
for assistance, the scout, who was quite wet from an earlier
fall in the Watercourse, became chilled and began to shiver
uncontrollably. As fate would have it, a group of cavers who
had recently completed an NCRC class happened to be in the
cave at the same time and came upon the scene. The cavers
took steps to warm the boy, assess his condition, and alert
local rescue agencies. He was soon declared fit to travel, and
was assisted toward the entrance. The call for help was
cancelled, and the group exited without further incident.
Doug Moore, Incident report, 9 April 2002.
Comments: Trip leaders, especially those leading youth
groups such as Scouts, should have at least basic first aid
training and should carry an appropriate first aid kit.
Wilderness first aid courses typically include training in the
assessment of injuries and evaluation of an injured person's
ability to travel. The decision to wait for help or head for the
entrance can be a difficult one, especially for those with no
training. One must be aware that waiting presents its own risks
- in this case, hypothermia - and that those risks may be quite
serious.


********** 20 March
Ten Mile Pit, Tennessee
caver fall, climbing without belay
Armed with nothing more than a rope and flashlight, Joel
Brooks (24) and Josh Allmon (23) ventured into the depths of
Ten Mile Pit on a Wednesday evening. The gated entrance to
the cave is adjacent to a golf course in suburban Knoxville,
and is a stair-stepped drop of about 75 feet, comprised of an
initial free drop of 15 feet, a mud slope about 40 feet long, a
10-foot climb-down to a ledge, and a final 20-foot drop to a
stream. Several thousand feet of cave passages lie beyond.
According to reports, Allmon lost his purchase near the top
of the climb and fell, tumbling down the slope and over the
final drop to land beside the stream. He injured his shoulder in
the fall, and could not climb out. Brooks climbed down to help
his friend, pulling him as far as he could, but was unable to get
Allmon out. Brooks then climbed out of the cave and ran
across the fairway of the 18th hole to a nearby house to
summon help.
The Knox County cave rescue team was dispatched, and
soon arrived at the scene. As a crowd of golfers and residents
watched, rescuers rigged and descended the pit, placed
Allmon on a backboard, packaged him in a litter, and hauled
him out of the cave. The rescue operation took about two
hours. Allmon was taken to a hospital where he was reported

---------- Page 16 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
to have a shoulder injury and several broken fingers. Brooks
told reporters that the duo would go spelunking again, but
stated, "I'll never be back in this one. I know that." It was
reported that trespassing charges were under consideration,
and that the cave gate was to be repaired.
1. David Brace, "Cave Accident," 'TAG-Net Digest #2786, 25
March 2002.
2. Bryan Mitchell, "Rescue squad retrieves man, 23, from
cave at Gettysvue," Knoxville News-Sentinel, 21 March
2002.
3. "Men may be Charged with Trespassing after Knox Co,
Cave Rescue," WATE 6 News, www.wate.com, 20 March
2002.
Comments: The name of the cave was reported in the news
accounts as "Pips Cave." There are several closed and gated
cave entrances in and around the golf course community. The
men stated that they had stumbled across the cave a few days
earlier and that the gate was open when they found it.


********** 30 March
Kaumana Cave, Hawaii
caver fall, dislocated shoulder
While exploring Kaumana Cave, near Hilo, Jen DuBois
(21) tripped and fell, dislocating her shoulder. Her
companions sent for help, and rescuers from the local fire and
rescue department responded, reaching her about 15 minutes
after entering the cave. Her arm was immobilized, and
rescuers assisted her as she made her way to the surface. She
was then taken to a hospital for treatment.
1. Desmond Wery, Incident report, 10 August 2002.
2. "Woman Injured in Hilo Cave", Hawaii Tribune-Herald, 1
April 2002, p. 10.


********** 7 April
Bowden Cave, West Virginia
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
Four individuals (early 20's) entered Bowden Cave early
on Saturday morning. They had no knowledge of the cave, had
little or no previous caving experience, and lacked proper
equipment such as helmets and backup light sources. When
they failed to return home Saturday evening, the parents of
one of the individuals called the State Police to report them
missing. The police notified the Elkins Fire Department,
which dispatched its cave rescue team.
By 1:30 a.m. Sunday morning, about 20 rescuers had
arrived at the cave, and a search began for the missing party.
They were found at the far end of the Watercourse at about
2:25 a.m. They were uninjured, and were led from the cave
without further difficulty.
Doug Moore, Incident report, 9 April 2002.
Comments: Moore observes that this was the first incident for
the newly-formed cave rescue team, which includes several
local cavers.


********** 18 April
Hell Below Cave, New Mexico
equipment problem, maillon opened
After about nine hours of caving in Hell Below, Cindy
Heazlit (44) donned her seat harness and prepared to climb the
first pit on the way out. She was tired from the combination of
the long trip, a lengthy day of travel and caving the previous
day, and accumulated sleep deprivation from a difficult week
at work, and did not notice that she had accidentally reversed
the orientation of the half-round maillon rapide used to close
the seat harness of her Frog climbing system. Instead of the
customary right-to-left orientation, the maillon was oriented
left-to-right.
Heazlit clipped her cave pack to the gate side of the
maillon with a carabiner and began climbing. As she climbed,
she noticed a clicking sound as she took each step. She also
noticed that the rope was not feeding through the chest
ascender normally. She stopped about 10 feet off the floor and
inspected her system. She noticed that the maillon was turned
at a 45-degree angle on her harness, which was unusual, but
was probably due to the weight of the tethered pack
Heazlit did not see anything else wrong, and SO continued
her climb, reaching the top and proceeding across a rope
traverse. She then unclipped her pack, went through a tight
spot, and climbed another 15-foot drop. At the top, she
discovered that the maillon was completely unscrewed and
open, leaving her seat harness unsecured.
Cindy Heazlit, Incident report, 22 April 2002.
Comments: Heazlit believes that the maillon gate was
unscrewed by movement of the carabiner against the screw
gate during her climb. The movement of the climbing rope
against the maillon gate during climbing has also been known
to open maillon gates when they are not properly oriented, and
could have been a factor.
Always check your maillon or carabiner gate orientation to
make sure that friction from the climbing rope will tend to
rotate it toward closure, rather than toward opening. Heazlit
had several indications that something was not right with her
system, but, probably due to fatigue, did not heed them. See
the 16 September 2002 report of a similar incident at Sótano
de Cepillo.


********** 19 April
Carpenter-Swago Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, climbing without belay
Walter Young (41) was attempting a 10-foot climb-down
in Carpenter-Swago Cave when his clothing became snagged
and then released suddenly as he was trying to squeeze
through the opening connecting Lower Carpenters Canyon
with the Stream Level. Young lost his purchase and fell,
breaking three metatarsal bones in his right foot.
Young found that by keeping his weight back on the heel
to avoid placing pressure in the mid-foot area, he was able to
walk without assistance. He made it back up the climb with
some difficulty, and was able to make his way from Lower
Carpenters Canyon to the Carpenter Pit Entrance, climbing
three rope drops in the process. Young tightened the heel strap

---------- Page 17 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
on his Mitchell system SO that the foot loop was held as far
back toward the heel as possible, reducing the pressure on the
injured area. Upon reaching the surface, Young was driven to
a hospital where he was treated and released.
1. Walter Young, Incident report, 9 February 2003.
2. Pete Johnson, "Northeast News," Northeastern Caver,
June 2002.


********** 20 April
Cassell Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, climbing without belay
Charles Danforth (29) and companions had just completed
a 13-hour survey trip into the South Fork of Cassell Cave. The
trip was described as "very sporting
with a number of
nuisance drops and climbs and plenty of exposure." The entire
party was tired and muddy when they reached the last obstacle
before the entrance - a 25-foot climb-down.
While the other members of the party descended via cable
ladder, Danforth, being the most accomplished rock-climber
on the team, remained above to derig the ladder and then free-
climb down the exposed face. He had done the climb half a
dozen times before, in both directions, and felt that it was not
difficult. A short piece of webbing used as a handline helps
protect one exposed part of the climb, and several hand and
foot placements are available.
After moving down the face about five feet, Danforth was
reaching for the webbing when his foot slipped from a broken
stalagmite that he was using as a foothold. He fell about 20
feet, and landed in a hole in the massive breakdown below.
Danforth fractured the talus of his right ankle in the fall, and
briefly lost consciousness soon after.
After he regained consciousness, the other three team
members fastened a harness on Danforth, got him warm and
hydrated, and belayed him as he crawled up a breakdown
slope about 100 feet to the entrance crawlway. The entrance
itself is very tight and two people on the outside and one
inside helped Danforth through the hole. The car was only
another hundred feet away. His companions drove him home
to Baltimore, where he went to a hospital for treatment.
1.
Charles Danforth, "Snap, Crackle, Pop: A Cassell Cave
Survey Trip with the Gangsta Mappers," The West
Virginia Caver, v20n3, June 2002, p. 13.
2. Charles Danforth, Incident report, 1 November 2004.
Comments: Danforth notes that he was tired and perhaps
inattentive, and that a belay would have prevented the
accident. It should have been easy to arrange, since a belay of
some sort should always be used with cable ladders anyway. A
climb like this can be belayed from below by running a rope
through a carabiner or screw link attached to a sling anchored
at the top.


********** 10 May
Crystal Ice Cave, Idaho
trapped, stranded, passage blocked by snow
Crystal Ice Cave is a former commercial cave formed in
lava in southeastern Idaho. The cave contains large rooms and
ice formations, and is a popular vertical trip for local cavers. A
42-foot entrance drop leads to various passages and eventually
to a second, 50-foot drop into a room with a 150-foot skylight
entrance. At about 10:00 a.m., Lance Taysom (41), his son
Jesse (8), a climber friend of Taysom's (39), and the climber's
son (13), prepared to rig a rope at the skylight entrance in
preparation for a through-trip.
The bottom of the skylight pit is visible from the surface,
and cavers can easily look down to verify that the rope hangs
free and reaches the bottom. The floor of the skylight was
covered in snow, which was not unusual for that time of year.
Typically the snow is less than two feet deep and makes
rigging for the ascent easier, as the snow makes a nice flat
platform over breakdown. Taysom rigged the pit with a 200-
foot rope and was able to see several coils lying on the floor,
verifying that it had reached the bottom and would be in place
when the party was ready to exit.
The group then went to the main entrance, where they
rigged a rope and descended the 42-foot drop without incident.
The cavers spent the afternoon exploring the cave, eventually
making it to the second drop, which they rigged as a pull-
down. After negotiating the drop, the cavers pulled the rope
and continued toward the skylight room and their anticipated
exit climb.
As the group approached the area of the skylight, Taysom,
who had made the through-trip several times before, was
puzzled by the absence of the light usually visible from the
skylight entrance above. When the group reached the area just
before the skylight, they found that the entire passage leading
up to the breakdown floor of the skylight shaft was blocked.
The exit was apparently completely filled by 15 to 20 feet of
hard-packed snow.
They were further puzzled by what appeared to be tracks
in the snow plume leading part-way up to the point where the
snow met the ceiling. Using a sharp rock and an ice screw,
Taysom was able to cut steps up the snow plume, eventually
reaching the ceiling and verifying that the passage was indeed
blocked.
A thorough search of the perimeter of the snow-filled
passage revealed an area where the snow, through settling or
sublimation, had pulled away from the passage wall, creating a
four- to six-inch space extending out of sight in the direction
of the skylight. Taysom placed an ice screw and belayed his
son Jesse up the plume.
Working together, they were able to enlarge the space
enough for Jesse to enter. After about three feet, the space
widened to about 18 inches and Jesse was able to follow this
new "lead" for about 20 feet until he could see sunlight
filtering through from above. Jesse was able to push and dig
his way out of the passage and onto the floor of the skylight
pit. He then returned and helped Taysom enlarge the space
enough to get the other members and their gear through. The
group then ascended the previously-fixed rope and exited
without further difficulty.
Lance Taysom, Incident report, 28 September 2003.
Comments: Taysom writes: The area surrounding the cave is
normally covered with grass and sagebrush extending for
several miles in all directions. During the previous summer, a
wild-land fire had removed the sagebrush, allowing the
prevailing east wind to transport large amounts of snow,
which fell into the skylight, filling the room to a depth which

---------- Page 18 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
covered the connecting passage. When the party dropped the
rope into the exit and saw that it reached the floor they did not
realize they were looking at a floor some 20 feet higher than
normal.
The second drop was unclimbable without ice-climbing
equipment. Had the party been unable to get through the snow
barrier, they would have had to wait several hours for their
overdue pre-plan to be activated and rescuers to arrive and re-
rig the second drop to allow them to exit. Although the group
had extra lights, water, food and a few extra dry layers, it
would have been a long, cold wait.
Taysom later learned that a group of college students
completing a short course on caving had entered the cave two
weeks earlier, planning to make a through-trip in a similar
fashion. That group descended and pulled the first drop rope
but discovered the snow-filled passage before pulling the rope
from the second drop. The group was able to back-track to the
bottom of first drop where they were stranded for almost an
hour, periodically blowing a rescue whistle until a student who
had not entered the cave heard and came to their aid. With
instructions from the cavers below, the student was able to re-
rig the drop, enabling the stranded cavers to ascend and exit.
Taysom advises all cavers planning through-trips of
Crystal Ice Cave to verify that the passage between second
drop and the skylight floor is passable before entering the
cave. He also advises cavers to consider carefully the added
risk and commitment of pulling the first or second drop ropes
during a through-trip.


********** 12 May
Trout Cave, West Virginia
illness, heart attack
An NCRC mock-rescue training exercise in Trout Cave
turned into a real rescue when a somewhat-overweight
firefighter experienced chest pain while in the cave. Stephen
Mosberg, a caver and physician participating in the exercise,
gave medical assistance and the stricken man was helped to
the entrance. There he was placed in a stretcher and lowered
down the hill to the road. A waiting ambulance took the man
to the Petersburg hospital for evaluation and treatment.
Bob Hoke and Pauline Appling, "Trout Cave Rescue," The
West Virginia Caver, v20n4, August 2002.


********** 16 May
Yo-yo Pit, New Mexico
fatality, caver fall, inadequate equipment
Ignoring a mandatory National Forest closure due to fire
hazard, Joseph Lobato (29) and his girlfriend went to Yo-yo
Pit near Santa Fe. Also known as Pankey's Crater, the pit is an
ancient volcanic vent with a 130-foot drop. It is located in a
remote area accessible only by high-clearance vehicles.
The reason for their visit is not clear, but Lobato
apparently dropped his cell phone into the pit while exploring
around the top. He went to his vehicle and retrieved a nylon
tow-strap, a come-along, several pulleys, some heavy-duty
chain, and two ropes. The ropes were of the type sold in
hardware stores for non-life-safety applications, and were
apparently not designed or rated for climbing or rappelling.
Lobato constructed a makeshift anchor by girth-hitching
the tow rope around a tree, backed up by the come-along, to
which he attached one of the pulleys. He tied his two ropes
together with a series of half hitches, and threaded one end
through the pulley and tied a series of six half-hitches to
secure the end. Together, the two ropes reached the bottom of
the pit, with the joining knot about 30 feet above the floor.
Lobato's girlfriend was concerned for his safety, but he
assured her that he had "done this type of thing before." She
later related that Lobato had no caving experience, but that he
had taken her out "climbing" a couple of times in the past, SO
she deferred to his judgment.
Lobato prepared for his descent of the pit, taking with him
a fishing creel containing two pulleys and several screw-lock
U-bolts. It is not known how he planned to use this equipment,
but it was not used for the descent. He began by placing the
rope under his bottom and, wearing gloves, letting the rope
slide through his hands. This was apparently unsatisfactory,
and he quickly changed his technique to descending hand-
over-hand.
He made it to a ledge about halfway down before losing
his grip and falling to the bottom. His girlfriend reported that
he was laughing all the way to the ground, and still laughing
after he landed. According to her account, he first said that he
thought he had broken his arm. A few minutes later, he said
that he could not feel his back. Finally, he said that he couldn't
move, and that she should get help.
Their only cell phone was at the bottom of the pit, SO she
had to drive back out along the rough dirt road and find a pay
phone, which took several hours. She called 911, and reported
the accident to the local fire department. Search and rescue
teams from surrounding areas were called in, but when they
reached the pit and called down to Lobato, there was no
response. Two rescuers rigged the pit and rappelled to the
bottom, where they found that he had expired. His body was
placed in a litter and hauled out of the pit.
1. Marc Beverly, "Accident Report: Yo-yo Pit, Santa Fe Co.,
New Mexico 5/16/02, Southwestern Cavers, v40n4, July-
August 2002, p. 41.
2. Erika Davila, "Rappelling victim died before help
arrived, Santa Fe New Mexican, May 18, 2002.


********** 27 May
Fault Cave, Colorado
caver fall
A geo-cacher visiting Fault Cave slipped and fell into a
crevice as he was leaving the cave, resulting in facial injuries
including a possible broken cheekbone. He was reportedly
wearing a helmet, but was also reported to have been taking
"unnecessary risks."
Anonymous report under the pseudonym "Indiana Cojones,"
Fault Cave Cache web page, www.geocaching.com, 2 May
2002.
Comments: Placement of geo-caches at this and several other
Colorado caves and the subsequent posting of location
coordinates on geo-caching web sites resulted in conflict
between local cavers and geo-cachers. Fault Cave is well-
known locally and has been heavily vandalized. Note the

---------- Page 19 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
similar incidents at nearby Tower Cave on 15 November 2002
and 11 January 2003.


********** 2 June
Tongue River Cave, Wyoming
rockfall entrapment
Barry Blaha (16), Danna Herbert (16), and seven other
teenagers were exploring Tongue River Cave on a Saturday
afternoon when a 300-pound boulder became dislodged and
fell, trapping Blaha and Herbert in a small passage. Several of
their companions went for help, and Sheridan County rescue
personnel responded. After several hours of work, rescuers
were able to move the boulder using a winch and other tools,
and the teens were freed at about 10:30 p.m.
1. Richard Rhinehart, "Briefly: News and Notes Regarding
Caves and Karst, Rocky Mountain Caving, v19n2, Spring
2002, p. 25.
2.
"Cave Rescue," KROE News, www.sheridanmedia.com
June 4, 2002.


********** 9 June
Pozo de Gavilán, Mexico
difficulty on rope, "killer bee" attack
Helios Medina and nine other cavers arrived at Pozo de
Gavilán, on a Saturday afternoon. The cave is a 300-foot deep
sinkhole about 200 feet in diameter, with a large, deep pool at
the bottom. Five members of the group, including Medina,
were cave divers and planned to enter the pool and explore the
submerged caverns below. The rest of the cavers were there to
help with the equipment and to practice vertical skills for an
upcoming trip to Sótano de las Golondrinas and Hoya de las
Guaguas.
On Sunday morning the cavers rigged the cave for descent.
There were no suitable trees or boulders near the pit, SO the
cavers used one of their vehicles as the primary anchor and
placed two ropes side-by-side in the pit. Medina began his
rappel of the 285-foot drop at about 10:00 a.m., with his
diving equipment tethered below his harness. About 100 feet
into the rappel, Medina noticed that his rate of descent was
increasing dramatically as the amount of rope hanging below
him decreased. He wrapped the rope around his leg to add
some friction and regain control of his descent. He managed to
slow down, but suffered a rope burn in the process.
The remaining cavers descended, and Medina and the
other divers entered the pool and explored to a depth of 120
feet, stopping at the entrance to a passage leading off from the
pool. Leaving that passage for another day, they turned their
dive and exited the pool without incident at about 2:00 p.m.
They began packing up their diving equipment, and prepared
for the climb out.
Medina decided to wait while the others climbed and be
the last one out, SO that there would be an experienced caver
on bottom to check climbing systems and assist the less
experienced climbers. Another experienced caver climbed out
first, to help any of the climbers who might have difficulty at
the top. At about 3:00 p.m., two cavers were on the surface,
and four others, one male and three female, were climbing in
tandem on the two ropes when Medina heard a scream from
above. One of the climbers had accidentally disturbed a large
nest of Africanized bees, which immediately swarmed and
attacked the four cavers on rope.
The two cavers on the surface heard the commotion, and
went to the edge of the pit. When they did so, they were also
attacked by the bees. Fighting off the insects, the more
experienced of the two cavers rigged a third rope into the pit
and rappelled down to help the stricken climbers. He attached
a lanyard to the first caver's harness, cut her ascender slings,
and climbed out of the pit, dragging her to the surface. He then
repeated the feat, rescuing the upper climber on the second
rope. Exhausted and vomiting as a result of his exertion and
the bee stings that he had suffered during his efforts, the caver
then used a cell phone in the vehicle to call for help.
Down below, Medina had donned his wetsuit for
protection, and told the other cavers still on the bottom to do
the same. He called up to the stricken cavers, telling them to
change over to rappel and come back down. One of the cavers
was about 80 feet above the bottom, and the other was about
40 feet higher. Whenever they tried to move, the bees would
renew their attack.
Medina decided to try to climb up to each of the climbers
and do a pick off, hoping that his wetsuit would protect him
from the worst of the insect stings. He climbed up to the lower
of the stranded climbers, while another caver climbed up the
second rope to help. Medina changed over to rappel, and
attached a cows tail to the stranded caver's harness. The
second caver then cut the stranded climber's slings, and
Medina rappelled to the floor with the stranded caver hanging
below him.
As Medina prepared to get back on rope to rescue the
remaining stranded climber, the ropes started jerking and
rising up the pit. Up on top, one of the cavers had decided to
start the SUV that the cavers had used for a primary rig point
and use it to haul the cavers out of the pit. He stopped when he
realized the plan was not working, but Medina was concerned
about the safety of the ropes and rigging, and felt that it would
not be safe to climb. The final stranded caver dangled 120 feet
above the floor, sobbing and pleading for help.
Medina and the other cavers at the bottom, one of whom
was a medical student, turned their attention to the rescued
caver, who was showing signs of shock. He had become
unresponsive, started shaking, lost sphincter control, and was
breathing irregularly. As the cavers started giving him
artificial respiration, they heard sirens above as emergency
personnel arrived at the pit.
By 4:15 p.m., about 50 rescuers had assembled at the top
of the pit. By this time, the caver still stranded on rope had
stopped moving and was unresponsive. Rescuers hauled up the
ropes, bringing her to the surface, and carried her to a waiting
ambulance. They were hampered in their efforts by the bees,
which continued to attack anyone moving within 300 feet of
the pit.
As darkness fell, the stricken caver on the bottom was also
hauled out and taken to the hospital. The remaining cavers
climbed out, with Medina last. He reached the surface at about
1:00 a.m.
Helios Medina, "El Pozo de Gavilán, The DecoStop,
www.thedecostop.com, 4 June 2004.

---------- Page 20 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Comments: The caver who worked at the top of the pit to
rescue two of the climbers spent that night and the next day in
the hospital. One of the women that he rescued had received
more than 600 bee stings, and was hospitalized for three days.
The other woman, who had accidentally precipitated the attack
and was the closest to the nest, received more than 900 stings
and was hospitalized for two weeks.
The male caver rescued by Medina had received about 400
stings, and was hospitalized for three days. The female caver
hauled out on rope had received more than 1,200 stings. She
spent a week in intensive care, then two more weeks in the
hospital, was returned to the intensive care unit for two days
due to a blood clot, and was finally released after several
weeks for an extended convalescence.
Africanized "killer" bees have been reported at a number
of pits in Mexico, most notably at Hoya de las Guaguas, and
now, Pozo de Gavilán. They have also been reported in cave
entrances in Arizona and New Mexico. Their venom is no
more potent than that of ordinary bees, but they tend to swarm
more easily and attack in greater numbers. They nest in holes
and crevices in cliffs and cave walls, and often build large
colonies that can be seen hanging from the rock.
The bees are aggressively territorial, and will pursue for
great distances. They are reported to be attracted to dark
clothing and movement, and to be disturbed by sound,
vibration, and certain odors. Most victims are overcome by
stings to the head and face. Fatalities have been reported
primarily among elderly victims.
Experts recommend covering your face and head with
clothing or other means during an attack and seeking shelter in
an enclosed place away from the bees. A section of mosquito
netting can be carried in a pocket and may provide some
protection for the face and head during an attack. The best
strategy would seem to be to avoid the bees whenever
possible.


********** 6 July
Dynamited Cave, Washington
caver fall, climbing cable ladder without belay
During the weekend of the Cascade Grotto's 50th
anniversary celebration, grotto members led several trips to
nearby Dynamited Cave, a large multi-level cave with a
"severely undercut" 15-foot drop which is sometimes rigged
with a cable ladder and sometimes bypassed via an exposed
climb. Eileen Bergen (52), her husband Van, and about 13
other cavers planned to enter the cave on Saturday and divide
into two groups for a tour of the cave. Van Bergen would lead
one group, while the other would be led by Dick Garnick.
Garnick had a cable ladder to use at the 15-foot drop, and
had rigged the ladder at the campground the previous evening
to allow those who had not used one to practice before the trip.
Eileen Bergen had no previous experience with cable ladders,
and took advantage of the opportunity. She had difficulty with
the "wrap-around" technique used to climb the free-hanging
ladder, and planned to use the bypass climb instead.
On Saturday morning, the group entered the cave and
made its way toward the ladder drop, about 650 feet into the
cave. Eileen Bergen had suffered previous problems with her
knee and foot, and was moving slowly and carefully to avoid
re-injury. Garnick and other cavers reached and rigged the
drop as she made her way through the cave. Most of the group
descended the ladder before Bergen arrived. No one used a
belay, even though a rope was available.
When Bergen reached the drop she thought it looked easy,
SO she decided to use the ladder rather than the bypass climb.
Cavers at the bottom offered to hold the ladder, and told her
that the "wrap-around" technique was not needed. She started
down the ladder using a conventional "toes-first" technique,
and without a belay.
The bottom of the ladder was resting on the top of a large
boulder at the top of a breakdown pile. As Bergen reached the
bottom and stepped from the last rung down to the boulder,
she lost her balance and her grip on the ladder and fell,
somersaulting onto the breakdown below, landing directly on
her head, and tumbling onto the rocks ten feet below. She
heard something pop or snap as she bounced on her head, and
felt pain in her neck and upper back.
A member of the party with First Responder training went
to her aid, and advised her not to move. She was not bleeding
or having trouble breathing, but the possibility of a neck or
back injury was a serious concern. The cavers took steps to
immobilize her neck, fashioning a neck brace from a SAM
splint and some duct tape, and tried to keep her warm while
they decided what to do.
Bergen felt that she could get out with a neck brace and a
little assistance, and did not want to call for a full rescue. Her
husband, Van, and two other cavers went out to retrieve a neck
brace, a sleeping bag, and equipment for a haul system, while
Garnick and the others stayed with Eileen. After further
discussion, they decided that it would be wise to notify
authorities and get some additional help, since the
consequences of improperly moving a person with a cervical
spine injury can be severe. One of the cavers left to go to the
nearest phone and call for assistance.
Van Bergen soon returned with the haul system gear and a
sleeping bag, and other cavers brought in an aluminum
extension ladder from the campground. Eileen Bergen waited,
wrapped in space blankets and the sleeping bag while the
cable ladder was removed and replaced with the extension
ladder and a hauling system. An EMT from the local fire
department arrived, and replaced the improvised cervical
collar with a real one. Bergen was packaged in a spine splint
and a litter, and was hauled up the drop in short order. A group
of about 20 cavers moved the litter over and through 650 feet
of breakdown passage to the entrance.
Bergen reached the surface about four hours after her fall,
and was taken by ambulance to a nearby hospital for
evaluation and treatment. Initial scans were negative, but a
more thorough examination revealed that she had suffered
compression fractures of her L3 and L4 vertebrae.
1. Van Bergen and Dick Garnick, Incident report, 21 July
2003.
2. Tish Korbly, Incident report, 11 July 2002.
Comments: Van Bergen wrote: "Obviously, everyone on the
ladder climb should have been belayed. No one was because
the drop seemed too short and too easy to bother. I suspect that
attitude is responsible for the majority of accidents Just as
obviously, proper ladder technique should be used, regardless
of what one's companions say and do, or whether anyone is

---------- Page 21 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
holding the bottom of the ladder. Cable ladders are
deceptively dangerous." Amen. Reports of falls from cable
ladders, almost always while climbing without a belay, are a
regular occurrence in American Caving Accidents.
Korbly, who was on the trip, wrote: "It seems to me we
failed to organize ourselves to be safe. All ladder climbs
should be belayed. Eileen especially needed to be belayed. She
had had trouble outside at the practice. [...] We failed to
protect ourselves and each other. I can imagine it would be
very hard to be the first one to ask for a belay when several
people had gone down without one." Difficult perhaps, but not
as difficult as the potential consequences of not asking. There
is no shame in asking for a belay. Trip leaders, if unsure of trip
members' abilities, can strongly encourage use of belays.


********** 9 July
Langdons Cave, Indiana
caver fall
Brent Lewis (33) was leading a group of four teenage
cavers (ages 16 to 17) on a trip through Langdons Cave. After
the group cleared the breakdown leaving the Keyhole, Lewis
slipped on a wet slab of rock and fell, breaking his left arm.
His companions cleaned and dressed the 6-inch laceration on
his arm, controlled the bleeding, and splinted the fracture, then
assisted him in exiting the cave and drove him to a hospital.
Brent Lewis, Incident report, 9 December 2002.
Comments: Lewis notes that the teens had completed the
NCRC Orientation to Cave Rescue class earlier in the year,
and had made a point to practice their training and to carry an
emergency kit containing first aid supplies on their caving
trips. We should all be as capable and diligent as they were.
July
Morris Cave, Vermont
caver fall
It was reported that during a July trip to Morris Cave a boy
slipped and fell down a slope, striking his back on a rock and
sustaining a fractured vertebra. Fortunately, he was able to exit
the cave with minimal assistance.
Chuck Porter, "Northeast News," Northeastern Caver,
September 2002.


********** 10 August
Martin Cave, Missouri
caver fall, inadequate equipment
Tracy Harrison (39) was celebrating her upcoming
birthday with a group of friends in Martin Cave, a privately-
owned cave on scenic easement property near the Current
River. She left the group with the intent of exiting the cave,
but failed to take a light with her. Harrison's friends heard her
fall, found her lying unconscious and bleeding from the ears at
the base of an eleven-foot-high drop-off, and summoned help.
Ranger Kelly Knutson responded by boat and was guided
to the scene. Upon receiving the report, Knutson had radioed
for help from other rangers and requested an ambulance.
Knutson, an EMT, found Harrison about 250 yards into the
cave. He administered oxygen and directed Harrison's friends
to keep her still while he radioed for additional help.
Rangers and other park personnel evacuated Harrison from
the cave. Harrison was then transported by a park boat to a
waiting helicopter that had landed on a nearby gravel bar in
the river. She was flown to Ozarks Medical Center in West
Plains, then to St. John's Hospital in Springfield, where she
underwent surgery, and was reported to be in critical
condition. The rescue was accomplished in just over two
hours.
Larry Johnson, "Cave Rescue; Life Saved," The Morning
Report - 18 September 2002, United States National Park
Service, www.nps.gov/morningreport, 18 September 2002.
Comments: Caving with no light? A helmet-mounted light
would be less likely to get left behind, but it seems that she
wasn't wearing a helmet anyway.


********** 11 August
Cave Mountain Cave, Arkansas
caver fall, inadequate equipment
Michael Wilson (45) was exploring Cave Mountain Cave
in the Buffalo National River Park with another man and two
women when he apparently lost his footing and fell into a pit
located about 300 feet into the cave. Wilson, who was
reported by his companions to have been "free climbing"
around the top of the pit, had no caving equipment or
experience, and was wearing sneakers, a T-shirt, Budweiser
shorts, and a black San Francisco Giants baseball cap. He
tumbled abut 35 feet, bounced off a ledge and fell 10 more
feet to the bottom, where his companions could hear him
moaning in pain.
One of Wilson's companions started out of the cave to get
help and came upon a group of three cavers who had just
entered the cave. Mike Nimmo and his teenage sons Michael
and Alex had decided to visit the cave that day, and were
planning to descend the pit. Wilson's companion enlisted their
aid, and they followed him to the top of the pit, where they
could hear Wilson moaning and talking below.
"You couldn't make out a lot of what was being said,"
Mike Nimmo reported, "but we could clearly hear, 'Get me
the Hell out of here.'
"
Wilson's companions stood by as Mike Nimmo rigged his
rope and prepared to rappel the pit. Before descending, he
dispatched one of Wilson's companions to call for additional
help. Nimmo then rappelled to the bottom, followed by
Michael and Alex.
They found Wilson lying on the floor, covered with
scrapes and bruises. Michael and Alex, who worked as
lifeguards at a local swimming pool, followed their first aid
training, checking Wilson for wounds and injuries, advising
him to keep still, treating him for shock, and covering him
with towels to help keep him warm and prevent hypothermia.
Wilson complained of pain in his ankles and hip, and
mentioned feeling numb. They noted that he already had
bandaged ribs, apparently from an earlier injury.
Michael and Alex tended Wilson for about 45 minutes,
until rescuers including park rangers and county emergency

---------- Page 22 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
personnel began to arrive and paramedic Lowery Hill
rappelled down to take over the medical care. Rescuers rigged
a haul system at the top and lowered a Stokes litter and back-
board into the pit, while Hill treated Wilson, starting an IV
drip and administering oxygen. Wilson was then packaged in
the litter and hauled out of the pit.
Rescuers carried Wilson out of the cave and to a waiting
helicopter, which transported him to a hospital for treatment.
He was later reported to be in fair condition, recovering from
multiple injuries, including head trauma.
1. Robert J. Smith, "Dad, sons climbing in cave help rescue
man injured in fall," Arkansas Democrat Gazette, 15
August 2002, p. 1B.
2. Tonya Fell, "Cave Rescue," The Morning Report - 26
August 2002, United States National Park Service,
www.nps.gov/morningreport, 26 August 2002.
3. Associated Press, "Spelunker injured in fall," 16 August
2002.
Comments: The cave is well-known locally, and has been the
scene of several similar incidents, including one fatality.


********** 17 August
Cemetery Pit, Georgia
stranded, exhaustion, difficulty on rope
Rescuers were dispatched to Cemetery Pit when a man
called 911 and reported that his companions were stranded at
the bottom of the 153-foot entrance shaft. Apparently, a group
of four men had rappelled into the pit, equipped with camping
gear, intending to explore the caverns below. Two of the men
had a little prior caving experience, while the other two had
none at all. One of the men had become stranded on a ledge
about 30 feet above the bottom of the pit. The men were using
prusik knots for the climb, and the stranded man was reported
to be "too tired to climb out."
The local cave rescue team responded, and rigged a haul
system at the top of the pit. The stranded caver was plucked
from the ledge, and his two companions were hauled out as
well, along with a large quantity of camping equipment.
Diane Cousineau, Incident report, 17 August 2002.
Comments: Clearly, the men should have spent more time
practicing their techniques before attempting a deep pit.
Several local grottos offer vertical training.


********** 25 August
Casparis Cave, Pennsylvania
stranded, inadequate equipment
On Sunday afternoon, Matthew Klink (29) and his nephew
Michael Williams (19) decided to take family member Shane
Klink (11) caving at Casparis Cave. The men had been to the
cave several times before, and wanted to show it to Shane.
They were driven to the cave by Klink's girlfriend, Kim
Geyer, who dropped them off at about 4:00 p.m. and planned
to pick them up later in the evening.
Shortly after the trio entered the cave, Williams dropped
and broke his flashlight. A short time later, Shane lost his
flashlight as well, leaving the group with a single working
light. "Just as we were on our way out, the bulb in my
flashlight went," said Matthew Klink. Having brought no
backup lights or spare bulbs, they had no choice but to sit in
the dark and wait for rescue.
Geyer returned to pick up the group at 6:30 p.m. as agreed,
but there was no sign of them. Thinking that they were still
exploring, she left to visit with Klink's mother and give them
more time. She returned an hour later, but there was still no
sign of the trio. Geyer asked another person who happened to
be at the cave to look for the missing group, but he was unable
to find them. She became concerned, and decided to call 911.
By about 10:30 p.m., rescuers from local fire departments
were assembled at the cave entrance, along with state police
and other emergency services personnel. They began a search
of the cave and eventually located the stranded party, bringing
them to the surface at about 4:30 a.m.
"Kim and my mom knew where we were, SO I knew
someone would come and find us," said Matthew Klink. "It
was pretty cold," he said. Klink stated that neither he nor his
companions planned to go caving again in the near future, but
that, "When I do, I plan to take a couple more flashlights,
more batteries and bulbs, and maybe a few more people."
Patty Shultz, "Spelunkers rescued from cave," Uniontown
Herald-Standard, 27 August 2002.


********** 11 September
unnamed lava tube, Hawaii
fell into hidden pit entrance
Firefighter Brent Matsuda (41) was participating in a
search for three missing hunters when he stepped on a fern and
fell through the foliage down a 100-foot pit. The search was in
the area of the Captain's Trail, which leads to the Puu Oo
eruption area from the rural Fern Forest subdivision. Matsuda
fell though a five-foot by eight-foot opening hidden by ferns
and other foliage, and plummeted about 100 feet into an
unusually large lava tube about 10:00 a.m.
Matsuda was pulled from the hole by fellow firefighters
using ropes, and was taken by helicopter to a hospital. His
injuries included broken ribs and vertebrae, and damage to his
liver and kidneys. He was later listed in critical but stable
condition, and was expected to recover. "His helmet and
backpack probably helped save his life," said Fire Captain
Quince Spencer.
The missing hunters walked out uninjured later in the day
about two miles from the trail where they started.
1. Newswatch, "100-foot lava-tube fall injures firefighter,"
Honolulu Star-Bulletin, 12 September 2002.
2. Rod Ohira, "Firefighter rescued from inside lava tube,"
Honolulu Advertiser, 13 September 2002.
3. "Firefighter recovers from wild ride," Honolulu Star-
Bulletin, 18 September 2002.
4. Cindy Heazlit, Incident report, 8 November 2002.
Comments: Heazlit writes: "This sort of thing happens all the
time in Hawaii. The vegetation is SO thick that you are
bouncing around on top of it, never touching the ground. Cave
openings are 'dark spots' in the vegetation. If you're not
specifically looking out for them, you won't see them. I've
fallen into cave entrances several times this way - the

---------- Page 23 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
vegetation has always caught me before the final crash. It
looks like Matsuda wasn't SO lucky."


********** 16 September
Sótano de Cepillo, SLP Mexico
equipment problem, maillon opened
Guillermo Gonzalez Canales (26) was on rope climbing
out of the 415-foot entrance shaft of Sótano de Cepillo when
he stopped to rest. As he sat down, he felt something strange
about his seat harness and looked down to discover that the
half-round maillon rapide used to close his harness had come
completely unscrewed, and that one of the harness attachment
loops had come out. He was suspended by the open maillon
and a single attachment loop. With some difficulty, he was
able to reattach the screw link and secure his harness. He then
completed the climb without further incident.
Guillermo Gonzales Canales, Incident report, 16 September
2002.
Comments: Canales was certain that he had completely closed
the screw gate on the maillon before beginning his ascent. It
seems likely that movement of the rope, or perhaps his
clothing or equipment, during the climb worked to unscrew
the gate. See the 18 April 2002 report of a similar incident in
Hell Below Cave. The orientation of Canales' maillon is not
known, but it is clear that cavers who use a harness employing
a maillon for closure and attachment should be aware of this
issue and take appropriate precautions. Canales reported that
he was planning to get a new harness that would not use a
maillon for closure.


********** 21 September
Cassell Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, difficulty on rope
At approximately 8:00 p.m. on Saturday evening, Mary
Schmidt, Mike Masterman, and Todd Leonhardt prepared to
descend the Pit Entrance of Cassell Cave in Pocahontas
County, intending to do a through-trip to the Windy Entrance.
As they were suiting up at the cars, rain began to fall, soon
increasing in intensity.
Leonhardt was the last person into the cave. He was
completely soaked before he began his rappel, and by the time
he was at the bottom he was cold and shivering. Given that he
was already soaked, hadn't slept in about 36 hours, and was
expecting a six-hour, fairly strenuous, through-trip, Leonhardt
thought it would be best to "bag the trip, ascend, and call it a
night" - he didn't want to risk becoming hypothermic
Masterman and Schmidt agreed.
Masterman decided to ascend first, in case Leonhardt
needed any help getting over the lip at the top. Masterman
climbed a little over ten feet up the rope and stopped, saying
that he was tired. He had helped someone put the roof on a
barn that morning, his ascending system wasn't adjusted quite
right, and it was taking him longer to ascend than expected.
Schmidt and Leonhardt suggested that he change over to
rappel and come down, then figure things out from there.
Masterman rigged his figure eight for descent and tried to
switch over to rappel, but was unable to remove one of his
ascenders from the rope. The torrential downpour had coated
the ropes with mud, hampering his efforts. The bottom 30 feet
of the pit requires ascending through a small waterfall, made
significantly worse by the hard rain, and Masterman was
becoming chilled hanging in the water.
A second rope had been left rigged by a party of cavers
surveying in the cave, SO Leonhardt ascended that rope to help
Masterman. As Leonhardt climbed up, Masterman
accidentally dropped some equipment which fell and struck
Leonhardt's helmet, causing his light to go out. Fortunately, it
was a model with dual bulbs, SO Leonhardt switched to the
alternate bulb. Among the dropped items were Masterman's
foot slings.
Leonhardt felt that without the foot slings to stand up in,
the situation had just gone from "very bad to truly
frightening." He tried to get Schmidt to throw them up, or tie
them to the rope SO they could haul them up, but the noise of
the waterfall prevented communication. Leonhardt then tried
to support Masterman's weight enough to allow him to
remove his remaining ascender from the rope, but that effort
also failed.
After struggling for some time, Masterman told Leonhardt
that he was "losing it" and couldn't hang on much longer. He
asked for a knife to cut himself loose, but none of the cavers
had one.
Leonhardt and Masterman kept trying and were eventually
able to get Masterman's ascender un-jammed. Unfortunately,
Masterman had not tied off his descender. As soon as his
ascender came off, "he dropped like a rock" about 15 feet to
the floor below, breaking his left tibia and fibula.
Masterman and Schmidt told Leonhardt to climb on up and
go for help. After hanging in the waterfall with Masterman,
however, Leonhardt felt that he was also "starting to lose it"
and was worried about his light malfunctioning, SO he changed
over and rappelled down.
While Schmidt started out to get help, Leonhardt tended to
Masterman, helping him remove his wet clothing and put on
some dry polypro. He then used some sticks and webbing to
splint and immobilize Masterman's leg.
Schmidt had some trouble getting up the pit - her ascender
jammed, and she had trouble with a redirection that the other
party had rigged in their rope. She decided it would be easier
to switch over to the other rope, SO Leonhardt pulled it toward
her and she was able to make the switch and get out.
About this time, the cavers of the survey party arrived.
They offered more warm clothes for Masterman, including a
balaclava and a space blanket. Three of them started out to get
more clothing for Leonhardt and a radio for communication at
the pit.
Schmidt made it out of the cave and went to a nearby
house, where she called for help. The local rescue squad
responded, and joined with the assembled cavers to bring
Masterman to the surface. The rescue was complicated by
weather, rigging, and communication problems, and took
several hours. Masterman reached the surface at about 2:30
a.m. and was taken by ambulance to a hospital in Elkins.
1. Todd Leonhardt, Incident report, 25 September 2002.
2. Bob Robins, "Cassell Cave Survey - The Bratwurst and
More, mywebpages.comcast.net/rrobins/pages/
trip_reports/Cassell_Cave_092102.html, undated.

---------- Page 24 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
3. Todd Leonhardt, "Cassell Cave Accident," The West
Virginia Caver, v20n6, December 2002, p. 7.
Comments: Leonhardt writes: "Heavy rain, fatigue, equipment
malfunction, and perhaps Mike being out of practice
ascending all played a role. Lack of adequate planning might
also have played a role - the party was planning a through-trip
and not on having to ascend out. Don't ask me how they
[Masterman's foot loops] managed to come off his ascender.
Perhaps he purposely took them off, but maybe not. It was
obvious that he was getting severely hypothermic and not
thinking straight at this point." Perhaps one should say
"operator error" rather than "equipment malfunction."
As one reviewer observed, this is a classic example of
cascading errors in judgment and procedure. Weather and
fatigue were merely secondary contributors to the incident.
Rehearsal of the change-over procedures for their vertical
systems would have greatly reduced the severity of their other
problems. The hazards associated with poor change-over
technique are well-documented.
Masterman's failure to tie off his descender was a critical
mistake - it should have been done when he put the descender
on rope. Leonhardt notes that he did not think to check it
either. Vertical cavers should practice their change-over
technique until it is second nature. As in this incident, you
may be called upon to use it under difficult conditions.
Finally, it is worth noting that even on a pull-down or
through-trip, cavers should be prepared to climb back out if
necessary. The failure to plan is a plan for failure.


********** 28 September
Howards Waterfall Cave, Georgia
caver fall
Ashley Chan, Andrea Burgess, and Suzi Beaumont were
leading a group of nine female university students on a novice
caving trip. After visiting nearby Sittons Cave, where they
were turned back by high water part-way through the cave,
they decided to tour Howards Waterfall Cave.
The group entered the main entrance and followed a
crawlway about 100 feet to a junction room with passages
leading in several directions on multiple levels. After
exploring several dead ends, they traversed across a steep
slope above a small pit to reach the main passage beyond. The
slope can be intimidating to novice cavers, and Burgess and
Chan coached and spotted the women as they crossed.
The group explored the passages beyond until about 5:00
p.m., when they decided to start out. At the junction room,
Beaumont led while Chan and Burgess once again assisted as
the cavers crossed the slope. As Chan was coaching the group
across the traverse, she noticed that one of the novice cavers
standing near her, a woman named Candy, had ventured near a
hole leading down to the lower level. Before Chan could call
out a warning, the woman stumbled and fell into the hole,
falling about 10 feet to the floor below.
Candy complained of pain in her right ankle and lower
back. She was alert and calm, and did not believe she had
broken anything, reporting only a feeling like "sore muscles."
Beaumont checked her for injuries and palpated her spine,
finding no point tenderness or other indication of fracture. The
location of the accident was within 150 feet of the entrance to
the cave. With the exception of the spot where Candy fell,
there was no difficult terrain. There was, however, a
"window" through which Beaumont had crawled to get to
Candy, and Beaumont wasn't sure a litter would fit through
this spot. She knew that a cave rescue with a litter would have
taken several hours and many resources. Beaumont explained
this to Candy, and asked her if she thought she could crawl
and/or walk out of the cave. Candy agreed to try.
Chan and Beaumont helped Candy move slowly, first
crawling, then inching through the window. Eventually she
was able to stand up and walk, with support. When they got up
to the spot where Candy had fallen, Burgess, with help from
some of the students who remained in the cave, spotted and
assisted Candy as she crossed the tricky slope on her belly.
Once past this spot she continued, crawling on hands and
knees, through the final 100 feet to the entrance.
The women assisted Candy to their van, helped her to
remove damp clothing, and made her as comfortable as
possible. They took her to a hospital, where examination
revealed a sprained ankle and a hairline fracture of the L2
vertebra. A CAT scan later revealed additional damage to her
vertebrae, and she remained hospitalized for three days before
being released. She was directed to wear a back brace for 12
weeks, and was expected to recover fully.
Suzi Beaumont, Incident report, 17 October 2002.
Comments: Beaumont reports that after the incident, Candy
explained that her headlamp had gone out just before the
accident. She knew she was at a tricky spot, but chose to
proceed, relying on the light from nearby cavers, until she was
across and could deal with the problem. Many experienced
cavers wear a backup light on their helmets for just such an
occurrence.
Beaumont adds that, in hindsight and knowing the extent
of the injury, it might have been better to send for help and a
backboard or spine splint. The decision to stay or go can be a
difficult one, especially when back or neck injuries are
involved.


********** 1 October
Maxwelton Cave, West Virginia
rockfall entrapment
Jeff Bray, Dave Scott, and Carroll Bassett entered an
ongoing dig on Scott's property near Maxwelton Cave around
7:00 p.m. Bassett was about 100 feet into the cave when he
brushed against something, triggering an avalanche of rock. A
large breakdown slab shifted and pinned his right arm and leg
to the floor. He was unable to free himself, and his
companions could not move the slab. Bray left the cave to call
for help and to get a jack from one of the vehicles while Scott,
a physician, remained with Bassett.
After making the initial call, Bray returned with a car jack
and an attempt was made to move the rock. When this failed,
Bray left to call for more help. Cavers began to arrive, and a
second jack was taken in, along with a crowbar, sledge,
wedges, and other equipment.
The two jacks were placed to lift and support the slab, with
one located near Bassett's right shoulder and the other near his
feet. Once the first jack was raised to support the slab, the

---------- Page 25 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
second was used to raise the foot of the slab until Bassett
could remove his leg. A few more turns on the first jack then
raised the upper portion of the slab, and Basset was able to
pull his arm from underneath.
Bassett had been pinned, lying in a prone position, for
about 90 minutes, and his arm had gone completely numb.
When he stood up to leave the cave, he suddenly felt chilled.
He began shivering uncontrollably and could not catch his
breath. After about a minute, the shivering subsided and he
felt able to leave the cave. He crawled toward the entrance,
and then rested while a paramedic assessed his condition.
Bassett was able exit on his own and was out of the cave by
9:30 p.m.
Carroll Bassett, Incident report, 26 February, 2003.
Comments: Bassett suffered nerve damage to his right arm and
hand, but expected to recover full use in about six months,
following extensive treatment and therapy. The dig later
became a new entrance to Maxwelton Cave.


********** 6 October
Buddha Cave, Indiana
caver fall, climbing without belay
Everett Pulliam (49) was injured when he fell from an
exposed climb about 15 feet inside the entrance of Buddha
Cave. He started up the climb wearing a heavy backpack
containing his photography and vertical equipment and using a
hand-line for support. He was part-way up when he lost his
balance, then lost his grip on the hand-line and fell about 10
feet to the cave floor.
Pulliam landed on his backpack, which may have
cushioned the fall somewhat. He reported feeling pain and
tenderness in his lower back. He left the cave and was driven
to a local hospital for evaluation, where he was found to have
badly bruised his back, left arm, and left foot.
Everett Pulliam, Incident report, 16 February 2003.
Comments: Pulliam reports that he had done the climb before,
was not worried about it, and did not feel the need for a belay.
He did not think about the pack, which probably put him off-
balance, leading to the fall. He notes that it would have been
better to remove the pack and pass it up, and that a belay
would have prevented the fall. A hand-line can give you a
false sense of safety. If you are not clipped on or tied in, they
are of little use in a fall.


********** 12 October
War Eagle Cave, Alabama
stranded, difficulty on rope
Glenn Hicks, Joe Prucinsky, Sherry Smith, and two other
cavers descended the 137-foot entrance pit of War Eagle Cave
without incident and explored the cave at the bottom. When
they were ready to leave, Hicks climbed out first SO that he
could coach or assist the others at the lip if necessary.
Prucinsky climbed last, in tandem with Smith.
The lip of the pit is a smooth flowstone slope curving
downward for about six feet with the profile of an open
umbrella, then steeply undercut, leaving the rope free-hanging
for the remainder of the drop. The climbing rope lies flat
against the flowstone, making it difficult to move an ascender
upward for the final few feet of the climb whenever there is
any weight on the rope below the ascender. Users of
ropewalker and Mitchell systems have struggled with this lip
on many previous occasions.
Smith climbed over the lip without difficulty, even with
Prucinsky hanging below her, but when Prucinsky started
over, he ran into problems. He had attached an additional
tethered ascender and unclipped the chest roller on his
ropewalker system in order to negotiate the lip, but the
ascender was below the edge of the flowstone. When he stood
up to push the ascender upward, his weight on the rope held it
tight against the flowstone, preventing movement. Further, the
attempt left a large amount of slack in the tether of the
ascender, which was at that point just above his knee ascender.
He found himself dangling in a precarious, semi-inverted
position. He struggled to move the ascender upward, but soon
became tired, and began to lose sensation in his legs.
Smith got back on rope and down-climbed to the edge of
the flowstone. She helped Prucinsky remove his foot ascender
and slide the knee ascender down SO that he could sit normally
in his harness and rest. Meanwhile, one of the other cavers ran
down to the vehicles and returned with a second rope. The
cavers attached a carabiner to the end of this rope and dropped
it down to Prucinsky, along with the foot ascender from a Frog
system. He attached the Frog ascender with its long foot sling
just below his tethered ascender, and clipped the rope and
carabiner into the top hole of his tethered ascender. While
Prucinsky stood in the foot sling of the Frog ascender, the
others pulled on the tag line and were able to drag the tethered
ascender upward. With this assistance, Prucinsky soon reached
the top.
Glenn Hicks, "Incident," TAG-Net Digest #2997, 29 October
2002.
Comments: The lip at War Eagle is notorious among local
cavers. It is common practice to rig a short rope with a knot
and loop in the end alongside the main line for assistance.
Climbers can stand in the loop or clip in to the short rope with
an additional ascender attached to their seat harness in order to
un-weight the climbing line and raise their ascenders.
While ropewalker and Mitchell systems have obvious
advantages in reducing the effort needed to ascend a rope, the
Frog and Texas systems offer better performance when
passing lips, rebelays, and obstructions. Cavers should know
their capabilities and limitations using their chosen vertical
systems, and ensure that they are appropriate for the
conditions they will encounter.


********** 15 November
Tower Cave, Colorado
caver fall, no belay, inadequate equipment
A geo-cacher slipped and fell while descending a chimney
to reach a geo-cache located in the cave. He was able to catch
himself, but reportedly tore some muscles or ligaments in the
process. He apparently had a rope and was descending hand-
over-hand.

---------- Page 26 ----------
2002 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Anonymous post under the name "brderX," Tower Cave
Cache web page, www.geocaching.com, 15 November 2002.
Comments: A similar incident occurred at the cave on 11
January 2003 and another occurred at nearby Fault Cave on 27
May 2002.


********** 24 November
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
caver fall
Tom Dotter and several companions were surveying in the
North Rift, where they were working on a steep, moist, mud-
covered slope. Dotter was working on the sketch when a
section of mud and corrosion residue broke loose,
precipitating him down the slope, sliding on his stomach. The
slide ended after several feet when his "tail bone intersected a
small pinch." He felt a little stiff, but was able to continue
surveying for three more hours before exiting the cave. He
was later reported to have fractured his coccyx.
1. Tom Dotter, Trip report, Carlsbad Caverns National Park,
25 November 2002.
2. Richard Rhinehart, "Briefly," Rocky Mountain Caving,
v20n2, Spring 2003, p. 5.


********** 14 December
Coon Cave, West Virginia
difficulty on rope, stranded
Mike Frisina and two companions entered Coon Cave to
explore and check some leads. Frisina had been ill the
previous evening, but felt up to a short trip. They descended
several climbs, traverses, and drops, including a 90-foot pit,
and reached the bottom of the cave without incident. When
they had completed their explorations at the bottom, they
climbed back up to a window in the side of the 90-foot pit.
The window is reached by a 30-foot rope traverse across a
ledge located about 30 feet above the bottom of the pit.
When Frisina reached the ledge, he clipped into the
traverse line with an ascender attached to his seat harness. He
began to pull himself toward the window, but found himself
struggling with the main line, which was pulling on the chest
roller of his ropewalker system. He detached the roller from
the main line, and suddenly found himself in danger of
becoming inverted. The ascender on the traverse line was
lower than his ropewalker ascenders, which were still attached
to the main climbing rope.
Frisina struggled to reattach the chest roller, but was
unable to do SO. He wound up hanging with his hands
interlocked over his feet, struggling to avoid complete
inversion. Frisina called for help, and one of his companions
tried to drop a line to him. Everything was covered in mud,
and in his semi-inverted position, Frisina could not manage to
secure himself to the line. The companion tied a loop in the
end and tried again. This time Frisina was able to grab the
loop and get his wrist through it. With a helpful pull from
above, he was able to stand up and chimney over to the
window and the safety of the passage beyond.
Mike Frisina, Incident report, 14 December 2002.
Comments: Frisina writes: "I have been climbing for 15 years
and have never had anything like this happen before. Was I
complacent? Maybe. Should I have gone on a vertical trip
after getting sick? Maybe not. Why did I remove the roller?
Not thinking? I have gone over it a thousand times in my head.
No one contributing factor, just many little things."
As several reviewers noted, Frisina's closing comment is
the key to this incident, and many others as well. Accidents
are seldom the result of a single catastrophic event. Rather,
errors in judgment and technique accumulate over time,
leading eventually to disaster.
Users of ropewalker systems should make sure to connect
a short sling between their seat harness and the upper of their
two foot ascenders. This safety sling is an essential component
of the ropewalker system and serves to prevent a full inversion
in the event that the chest roller is detached. Some ropewalker
users wear a Croll or similar ascender below the chest roller
for resting and for additional security. Others climb with an
ascender on rope above the roller. Time spent outside the cave
practicing change-overs and rebelays, and negotiating
transitions between rope traverses and ascent or descent is a
worthwhile investment for all vertical cavers.
Frisina notes that he plans to use a Frog system for future
trips in "these muddy, tight, traverse-laden West Virginia
treasures." Frog users are quick to extol the virtues of their
chosen system in such conditions, with good reason.


********** 24 December
Bloomington Cave, Utah
fatality, caver fall
Kiley Jaquays (17) visited Bloomington Cave on
Christmas Eve with 14 other students and five counselors from
a residential treatment program for troubled teens. The cave is
a mile-long tectonic cave in limestone near St. George, and is
a popular and well-known destination.
Jaquays was near the cave's register in a passage known as
the Boardwalk when she stumbled and fell, tumbling about
275 feet down a 45- to 50-degree slope covered with
breakdown. Members of her party witnessed the fall, and
immediately sent for help.
Rescuers arrived within 90 minutes, but found that the girl
had died from her injuries. They worked through most of the
day to bring out her body.
1. Associated Press, "Teen dies in St. George Cave Fall,"
The Salt Lake Tribune, 26 December 2002.
2. Jane Zhang, "Name of fall victim released," St. George
Spectrum, 26 December 2002.
3. Richard Rhinehart, "Illinois girl's death may close cave,"
Rocky Mountain Caving, v20n1, Winter 2003, p. 6.
Comments: The cave is a popular destination, and few visitors
are equipped with helmets and other appropriate caving gear.
According to the Rocky Mountain Caving article, a similar
accident occurred in the cave earlier in 2002, when a teen fell
in the cave and had to be rescued.

---------- Page 27 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 1 January
unspecified cave, Estill County, Kentucky
caver fall, broken leg, hypothermia
Phillip Brown and companions were exploring a small
cave in Estill County when Brown fell down a 30-foot pit
about 40 feet inside the entrance, breaking his leg. His
companions left the cave to get help, and local firefighters
were dispatched to the scene. The entrance to the cave is a 12-
inch by 16-inch crack, leading to a chimney traverse above a
10-foot pit followed by a squeeze through a short keyhole
passage to the top of the 30-foot pit.
Firefighters entered the cave and quickly located Brown.
They could see and talk to Brown, but were unable to get
through the keyhole and down the pit to reach him. After
several attempts, they called for assistance from another
department with cave rescue training and equipment. They
dropped some cotton blankets down to Brown, hoping that he
could at least keep warm during the wait. Unfortunately, water
dripping into the pit soon soaked the blankets, and they were
of little comfort.
After a 50-mile drive, rescuers from the Jessamine County
fire department arrived at the cave. Rescuers Chad Greathouse
and Mark Traylor entered the cave, rigged the pit, and
rappelled down. They found Brown sitting at the bottom,
suffering from a compound fracture of his lower right leg, a
lacerated hand, and mild hypothermia. His light had been
smashed in the fall, and had been sitting there in the dark for
about five hours.
Greathouse and Traylor bandaged and splinted Brown's
leg, bandaged his hand, and checked him for other injuries,
particularly spinal injuries. Finding none, and realizing that
the keyhole and entrance squeezes were too small to pass a
litter through, they decided to haul him up the pit in a harness.
While arrangements for the haul were being made, they
constructed a heat tent for Brown using a space blanket and a
carbide lamp.
A haul line was rigged from outside the cave, through
several directional pulleys, and down the pit. Greathouse
attached himself and Brown to the end, and rescuers began
hauling. As they reached the top of the pit, Greathouse
changed over to the rappel line and guided Brown through the
keyhole passage. Brown was then lowered down the 10-foot
drop, hauled up the other side, and pulled through the
entrance. Outside the cave, he was placed in a litter and hauled
up the hillside, then driven to a waiting ambulance. He was
taken to a hospital for treatment.
Chad Greathouse, "A Muddy Mission: Kentucky Cave
Rescue," Advanced Rescue Technology, October/November
2003, p. 76.
Comments: Greathouse reported that the heat tent worked SO
well that Brown was soon warm, and did not become chilled
again until he reached the surface, where the temperature was
just above freezing. He also notes that running the haul system
from outside the cave reduced congestion in the cave but
resulted in excessive friction in the system, as well as
difficulties in communications.
Finally, Greathouse notes that Brown had specifically
asked for a cave rescue team when he sent his companions for
help, but that "somewhere along the way this was translated
into dispatching the local fire department." Cavers should be
aware that local emergency response agencies may not have
cave rescue training, and may not be aware of cave rescue
resources available to them. While requests for assistance
must come from the local authority having jurisdiction, cavers
should be aware of cave rescue teams and resources in their
area, know how to contact them, and be prepared to help and
encourage the local authorities to call on them for assistance.


********** 11 January
Tower Cave, Colorado
caver fall, no belay, inadequate equipment
A geo-cacher slipped and fell while descending a rope
ladder to reach a cache located in the cave. He fell to the
bottom of the ladder, but suffered only scrapes and bruises.
Anonymous post under the name "ChrisDish," Tower Cave
Cache web page, www.geocaching.com, 11 January 2003.
Comments: Similar incidents occurred at Tower Cave on 15
November 2002 and at nearby Fault Cave on 27 May 2002.


********** 18 January
Cemetery Pit, Georgia
stranded on rope, illness
After several hours spent exploring passages in Cemetery
Pit with several companions, a female caver was on rope
climbing the 153-foot entrance pit when she began
experiencing seizures. Her husband, who was climbing
alongside her on another rope, was able to pull her over to a
large ledge and get her off rope.
After evaluating her condition, the woman's husband felt
that they should get some help and haul her out of the pit
rather than having her try to climb. Other members of the
party climbed out, went to a phone, and called for help. The
Dade County cave rescue team responded, rigged a haul
system at the cave entrance, and hauled the woman up to the
surface. She declined transport to a hospital.
Diane Cousineau, Incident report, 19 January 2003.
Comments: The caver reportedly had a history of seizures, and
was on medication for them. She had discussed caving with
her physician, who had approved the activity.


********** 1 February
Pettijohns Cave, Georgia
caver fall
A youth group of 13 children and one adult leader were
exploring the cave when one of the children, a young girl, took
the wrong route and fell about 10 feet while climbing down a
hole in the breakdown. The group leader was able to pull her
out. She was bruised and shaken, but not seriously injured.

---------- Page 28 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Eric Ingman, Incident report, 3 February 2003.
Comments: Children in caves require constant supervision. A
group of 13 should have been accompanied by several
experienced cavers, and provided with proper lights and
helmets. Some caves, such as those requiring a lot of climbing
on or over breakdown, are not suitable for such trips.


********** 20 February
Sistema de los Tres Amigos, Oaxaca, Mexico
difficulty on rope, dropped ascenders
Mike Frazier was on rappel in a 200-foot pit when he
stopped to set a bolt for a rebelay. In the process, he
inadvertently dropped the pack containing the foot and safety
ascenders of his Frog system down the pit. He decided to
finish setting the rebelay and continue to the bottom, hoping
that the rope would reach. Unfortunately, it did not, and he
was left hanging well above the floor.
Frazier tied off his rappel rack, pulled up the end of the
rope, and used the tail to tie a makeshift foot sling above the
rack. Several half-hitches served as a climbing knot, a
butterfly knot in the middle provided a clip-in point for his
cows tail, and a double figure eight formed a pair of foot
loops. He clipped the chest ascender into the rope, removed
his rappel rack, and climbed out of the pit. Frazier and
companions then re-rigged the pit with additional rope and
descended without further incident.
Michael Frazier, "Mexico Caving Adventure," Rocky
Mountain Caving, v20n2, Spring 2003, p. 16.
Comments: Frazier's skill and quick thinking got him out of a
sticky situation, and serve as a good lesson for vertical cavers.
February
Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
difficulty on rope, injured knee at rebelay
Aaron Zumpf entered Cueva Cheve with three companions
on a trip to rig drops en route to Camp Two. While descending
the Elephant Shaft, Zumpf hyperextended his knee while
crossing a rebelay. He made it to the bottom, and told his
companions what had happened. His knee was painful, but
was not swollen and did not seem to be fractured. Zumpf felt
that he could leave the cave after some rest. Another team of
cavers, who were making a day-trip, was following, SO he told
his companions to continue on without him and settled down
to wait, planning to make his way out with the second team.
By the time the second team arrived, however, Zumpf's
knee had become very painful and he realized that he would
need more than a little help to leave the cave. One member of
the team stayed with him while two others left the cave to get
help and equipment.
Expedition members entered the cave with ropes, pulleys,
and additional equipment to rig hauling systems. They rigged
a counterbalance haul to get Zumpf up the Elephant Shaft, and
started helping him toward the entrance. A litter was brought
into the cave to make it easier to move Zumpf through the
horizontal sections of the cave. After several hours of work
and a few more hauls up the entrance pit series, Zumpf
reached the surface at about 4:00 a.m.
Michael Frazier, "Mexico Caving Adventure," Rocky
Mountain Caving, v20n2, Spring 2003, p. 20.
Comments: Frazier notes that Zumpf had just picked up some
additional rope before starting down the pit, and did not have
his pack tethered. He speculates that the additional weight and
the resulting high center of gravity probably contributed to the
accident.


********** 4 March
unnamed cave near Collegedale, Tennessee
child fell into cave entrance and drowned
A 22-month-old boy drowned after falling through the 25-
foot deep entrance shaft of a small cave and landing in a pool
of water. The boy was playing in his back yard when he
apparently fell into the entrance, a narrow shaft in a sinkhole
about 150 feet from his house. When the boy's mother noticed
that he was missing, she searched the yard and found the cave.
Fearing that he had fallen in, she called 911 and the cave
rescue team was dispatched to the scene. The first rescuers to
arrive could not fit though a constriction in the entrance. A
smaller caver was able to squeeze through, and found the child
in the pool. Rescuers were unable to revive him.
1. Buddy Lane, Incident report, 4 March 2003.
2. Dick Cook, "Toddler dies in backyard cave fall,"
Chattanooga Times Free Press, 5 March 2003, p. B-1.


********** 9 March
Gruta del Río Chontalcuatlán, Guerrero, Mexico
fatality, rockfall, caver fall
A female visitor was climbing down the entrance canyon
of the upper entrance of the cave when a person above her
dislodged a rock. When the rock struck the woman in the
head, she lost her purchase and fell down the slope. She died
from injuries sustained in the fall. Several rescue groups from
the surrounding region worked together to recover her body
from the cave.
1. Bill Mixon, "Mexico News," AMCS Activities Newsletter
Number 26, June 2003, p. 7.
2. Sergio Santana, "Asunto: Accidente en el Río
Chontalcuatlán (Mexico)," Iztaxochitla email list, 10
March 2003.
Comments: Mixon writes that another fatality, a drowning,
was reported to have occurred in the Dos Bocas caves earlier
in 2003. He notes that the caves of the area are very popular
destinations, and that untrained local guides take poorly
equipped tourists into the caves.


********** 22 March
Sinks of the Roundstone, Kentucky
caver fall
Peter Stow (22) was leading a group of Boy Scouts on a
caving trip when the group came to a large sloping rock lying
across the passage. The rock was wet and slippery, and sloped
into a 5-foot deep hole, SO Stow positioned himself to help the
Scouts across. One of the Scouts slipped as he was crossing

---------- Page 29 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
the rock and threw his arms up for balance, inadvertently
striking Stow in the face and breaking his nose. The Scout slid
into the hole, but was uninjured.
Peter Stow, Incident report, 28 March 2003.
Comments: Stow observes that a belay or a traverse line might
have been more effective in avoiding or stopping a slip. We
concur. Cavers leading youth groups should probably err on
the side of caution. A 20- or 30-foot length of rope or webbing
can be useful as a safety or belay line, and does not take up
much room in the pack. "Be prepared."


********** 23 March
Tiftonia Pit, Tennessee
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
Rob Rodd (32), David Brian (23), David Ware (20), and
Chris Billing (21) rigged a 11/2-inch inch rope of indeterminate
origin at Tiftonia Pit at about 7:00 p.m. on Sunday evening.
Two of the men had joined the Marine Corps, and were
scheduled to leave for Paris Island the next morning. They had
decided that some rope climbing practice might be helpful,
and thought that the 80-foot entrance shaft of the popular
roadside pit seemed like a good place for it.
The men had no helmets, lights, or vertical caving gear,
and descended the pit hand-over-hand. Brian and Billing
managed to get out, but Rodd and Ware were unable to make
the climb back up the rope. After trying unsuccessfully for
some time to get the stranded men out of the pit, Brian and
Billing decided to get help. They went to a nearby house and
called 911 at about midnight.
The cave rescue team was dispatched to the pit to help the
stranded men. Upon arrival, rescuers found one of the men
waiting on a ledge in an alcove about halfway up the pit, and
the other waiting at the bottom. Rescuers rigged their own
rope next to the one the men had used, and a rescuer
descended and provided each of the stranded men with a seat
harness. They were then hauled out of the pit. The rescue was
completed shortly after 1:00 a.m.
1. Mark Brown, "Rescue at Tiftonia Pit," The TAGline,
Chattanooga Grotto, May 2003, p. 4.
2. Buddy Lane, Incident report, 23 March 2003.
Comments: The cave is a large pit entrance beside a paved
road in a suburban area. It has been the scene of many similar
events over the years, and is closed by its owners.


********** 29 March
Womer Cave, Pennsylvania
rockfall entrapment
A group of York Grotto cavers visited Womer cave for a
trip organized by Mark Engle. The cavers were divided into
two groups, one led by Engle and the other led by Kevin
Dunleavy (41).
Dunleavy took his group into the cave, eventually arriving
at a junction with a tight passage leading to the Shoemaker
Room near the back of the cave. He had not been down the
passage himself, but had been told that it was only a 10 to 20
minute side trip, SO the cavers decided to leave their packs at
the junction. Three of the cavers decided to wait with the
packs.
Dunleavy followed three other cavers down a small
passage and through an 18-inch high crawl underneath
wedged rocks. As he emerged from the crawl, the cavers
discovered that the passage ended.
When he turned to go back through the crawl, Dunleavy
was dismayed to see that they had crawled underneath what
appeared to be an unstable pile of breakdown. He started back
through the crawl on his back, being very careful to avoid
touching the rocks in the ceiling. Suddenly, a 50-pound rock
slid down onto his upper legs, pinning him in the crawl.
Dunleavy called to the three cavers trapped behind him,
asking them to try to move the rock. It was tightly wedged,
however, and they were unable to free him. They felt that they
might be able to break the rock with a hammer, or possibly
wrap it with webbing and lift it. Unfortunately, they had left
their packs in the passage on the other side of the crawl.
Dunleavy called to the three members of the group who
had waited at the start of the passage, and told them what had
happened. Two of the cavers went to get Engle and the other
group, while the other, Skye Fisher, stayed to try to help the
trapped cavers.
After working on the rock for a while, Dunleavy found that
he could move it somewhat, relieving the pressure on his legs.
About 30 minutes into the incident, one of the trapped cavers
remembered that he had some rope in his pack. This was
quickly retrieved by Fisher, who was able to pass it through a
crack in the breakdown to the cavers beyond.
After some experimentation, Dunleavy was able to lift and
move the rock just enough for the others to pass the rope
around it. With that advantage, they were able to lift the rock
and allow Dunleavy to crawl free. The passage was quickly
cleared, and the other three cavers soon joined their
companions. Engle and the rest of the group arrived a few
minutes later. After some rest, the cavers continued their tour
and left the cave without further incident.
Kevin Dunleavy, Incident report, 4 May 2003.
Comments: Dunleavy writes: "Cavers should never be
separated from their packs, but this was 'only 10-20 minutes,
we'll be right out.' I've heard that many times before and it bit
four of us."


********** 15 April
Midnight Cave, Texas
stranded in pit, inadequate equipment
Two teenage boys were rescued from Midnight Cave in
Southwest Austin on a Tuesday evening after becoming
stranded at the bottom of the 50-foot entrance drop.
Firefighters believed that the boys descended a rope hand-
over-hand, but were unable to climb out because "the rope was
15-to-20 feet short." Neither boy was seriously injured, but
one boy was reported to have hurt his back. Rescuers were
reported to be uncertain how the boys managed to get into the
gated cave.
"Firefighters rescue boys in cave," News 8 Austin,
www.news8austin.com, 15 April 2003.

---------- Page 30 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 26 April
Laurel Caverns, Pennsylvania
caver fall
John Graybeal (12) was part of a group of nine Boy Scouts
from a Maryland troop participating in a "high adventure" trip
into the wild section of Laurel Caverns. Led by a guide, the
group was in a passage known as "The Beach," where a sandy
floor surrounds large breakdown blocks. Graybeal was
crossing some of the breakdown when he slipped and fell,
breaking his femur and wrist.
Laurel Caverns is a commercial tour cave, and the
operators have installed a phone line though much of the cave
in case of emergency. Guides used the phone to call for help,
and cavern employees called authorities to request a cave
rescue team, before starting into the cave with heat packs,
blankets, and other supplies. When they reached Graybeal,
they moved him to a safe location, splinted his leg and arm,
and treated him for shock, covering him with blankets while
they waited for the rescue team.
Rescuers worked for about seven hours to bring Graybeal
to the surface, placing him in a litter and carrying him through
several thousand feet of passage. He was flown by helicopter
to a hospital for treatment.
Jan Ackerman, "Boy Scout rescued after fall deep inside
Laurel Caverns," Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 28 April 2003.


********** 28 April
Cave Hill Cave, Illinois
lost, stranded, hypothermia, inadequate
equipment
Josh Myogeto (15), Garrett Mausey (19), and Garrett
DeCoursey (18) set out at 3:30 p.m. looking for adventure in
Cave Hill Cave, a popular wild cave known for its mazy
passages. They found it when they became lost in the cave and
spent the night searching for the way out, before finally being
located by rescuers at about 6:30 a.m. the next day.
The teens entered the cave at about 4:00 p.m., using string
to mark their route. The string ran out before the cave did, but
they kept going. Soon, they were completely lost. They
wandered around the cave until about 3:30 a.m., when they
finally settled down to wait for rescue.
Fortunately, DeCoursey's father was aware that they had
gone to the cave. When his son missed curfew and did not
answer his cell phone, DeCoursey knew something was
wrong. "It wasn't normal," he told a reporter. "He still had to
be in that lousy cave."
DeCoursey called the Sheriff's Department at about 10:25
p.m. to report that the boys had not returned from the cave. An
officer located their vehicle parked nearby, and a search was
initiated. A rescue team from the Illinois Department of Mines
was called in from Springfield, while local rescuers made a
hasty search of the area just inside the entrance. Members of
the mine rescue team arrived as the hasty search was
completed, and entered the cave at about 3:13 a.m.
After about three hours of searching, the boys were found.
They were settling down to sleep when they heard searchers
calling their names. The teens were wet, muddy, and thirsty,
but unharmed. Rescuers led them to the entrance, where a
large crowd had gathered. They were treated for mild
hypothermia and returned to their parents.
1. Raygan Swan, "Cave trip turns into all-nighter for teens,"
Evansville Courier, 30 April 2003.
2. Brian DeNeal, "Three rescued after 11-1/2 hour cave
exploration, Harrisburg Daily Register, 29 April 2003.
Comments: One member of the rescue team told reporters that
"people who explore caves should be properly prepared." He
explained, "To avoid getting lost, use a string or cable system
leading to the entrance of the cave." As noted above, the boys
had used string, but ran out. Somehow, that always seems to
happen.


********** 28 April
Onesquethaw Cave, New York
flood entrapment
A group comprised of seven students and four friends
visited Onesquethaw Cave on a trip sponsored by the Union
College Outing Club. Most of the participants had been caving
before, and the two leaders were familiar with the cave. The
group had obtained permission, and had appropriate
equipment for the trip, including helmets, lights, warm
clothing, and extra batteries.
The cavers entered at about 9:00 p.m. and spent about two
hours exploring before heading out of the cave. When they
arrived at a small chamber about 1,000 feet from the entrance,
they found the passage flooded. One of the leaders tried to
crawl through, but the passage was completely sumped.
With no alternative, the cavers settled down to wait in the
20-foot long, four-foot wide, three-foot high chamber. They
shared their food and clothing, and huddled together for
warmth as they waited.
The water level in the passage continued to rise slowly for
about two hours, and then began to subside. After about three
more hours, it had dropped enough for them to make their way
out. They emerged at about 4:15 a.m., cold and tired, but very
relieved.
1. Carolyn Stead, Incident report, 12 May 2003.
2. "Spelunkers happy to be above ground," Union County
Chronicle, v58n5, 2 May 2003.
Comments: The cause of the flood event remains unknown.
There was no rain in the area, and the passage was not known
to be prone to flooding. There was some speculation that
leakage from an inadequately cased well at a nearby house
might have affected water levels in the cave.


********** 10 May
Memorial Day Cave, West Virginia
flood entrapment
Mike Frisina and five companions entered Memorial Day
Cave at about 10:00 a.m. on a survey trip to a remote section
of the cave. They expected to be in the cave for about 24
hours, and were prepared and equipped for a lengthy trip.
They made their way through the upper section of the cave
without incident, arriving at the 125-foot Puppet Buster drop

---------- Page 31 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
at about 12:30 p.m. and descending into Columbia Canyon, a
large lower-level trunk passage leading to the survey area.
The cavers made the three-hour trek to the far end of
Columbia Canyon, where they split into two teams and began
surveying. At one point, one of the teams surveyed through a
large room floored with mud hills 20 to 30 feet high. They
noted that the mud was very slick, apparently from recent
flooding. As they completed their survey of the room they
discovered that one of their earlier survey points, located close
to a pool, was now under water.
The cavers continued surveying until about 1:30 a.m., and
then headed for the entrance. As they neared the bottom of the
Puppet Buster drop, they found themselves stopped by an
unexpected obstacle. Water had filled the passage, forming a
pool almost 100 feet long and 15 to 20 feet deep. There was
no way around, and no other way up the pit. The prospect of a
100-foot long swim, weighted down with vertical gear and
other equipment, was not enticing.
Pete Penczer decided to give it a try. Emptying his pack of
all but the essentials, he entered the water. He made it about
10 feet, struggling to stay afloat, before turning back. In a
flash of inspiration, the cavers filled Penczer's pack with
empty water bottles. With the aid of this makeshift flotation
device, Penczer was able to swim and float across the pool and
reach the rope hanging just beyond. As his companions settled
down to wait, he started out of the cave to get some help.
Penczer made his way out without incident, and arrived at
the cavers' nearby field house at about 9:45 a.m. He reported
the situation to the cavers there, and a rescue party was
assembled. Shortly after 11:00 a.m., a group of cavers entered
the cave carrying an air mattress, food, and extra clothing.
After six hours spent waiting at the edge of the pool, the
stranded cavers were relieved to hear the sound of their friends
as they arrived at the Puppet Buster. A wetsuit-wearing caver
swam across the pool trailing a rope and carrying the air
mattress, and the cavers were pulled across the flooded
section, one by one. Food and dry clothes were distributed,
and the cavers began making their way out. The last members
of the group reached the surface at about 7:15 p.m., after 33
hours underground.
Mike Frisina and Kevin Flanagan, "Memorial Day Delayed
Exit Trip, www.psc-cavers.org, undated.
Comments: Frisina reports that it was a rainy weekend, with
cloudbursts dropping as much as two inches of rain in an hour
for a total rainfall of about six inches in the area. The cave was
a relatively recent discovery, and the passage had not been
known to flood before this incident. As one reviewer noted,
new caves should be regarded with extra caution, since their
hazards and characteristics are unknown.
Limestone caves are formed by water and in many areas
they serve as natural storm drains. In such areas, flooding is
always a possibility. Cavers should keep this in mind when
exploring new discoveries, and especially when planning
lengthy trips underground. Many cavers seem to possess an
unfounded confidence in their weather forecasting abilities, or
in their understanding of hydrology, or both. Entering a stream
cave on a rainy day might be considered unwise.


********** 15 May
Fountain Pit, Alabama
difficulty on rope
A group of cavers was visiting Fountain Pit and enjoying
the 100-foot entrance drop. Several cavers had descended
without incident when one member, a 44-year-old man,
prepared to rappel. As the caver started over the lip, he kept
his feet planted at the edge of the drop as he let the rope feed
through the rack, lowering himself to a near-horizontal
position. At that point, he lost his footing and was thrown
sideways against the side of the shaft. He lost control of the
rope, and his rappel rack became wedged in a slot in the lip,
leaving him unable to descend.
With some assistance from other cavers at the top, the man
was able to regain the surface. His rack had been bent in the
fall, and he sustained some scrapes and bruises on his arms.
After straightening the rack and resting for a while, the man
made the descent without further incident.
Ira Sasowsky, Incident report, 6 June 2003.
Comments: Sasowsky notes that the caver had been caving off
and on for about 26 years, but had not been on rope in some
time. The cavers apparently felt that the damaged rack was
safe to use. It is generally a good idea to retire and replace
damaged life safety equipment.


********** 17 May
Buckners Cave, Indiana
stuck, hypothermia
Jarod Watt (20) and two friends entered Buckners Cave
early on Saturday morning. While crawling through a narrow
crevice above a stream crawl, Watt became stuck. His
companions were unable to free him, SO one stayed with him
while the other went to summon help.
Emergency personnel including cave rescue team members
worked through the night to rescue Watt, using drills and other
equipment to remove a rock in the crevice that was obstructing
his movement. He was finally freed when rescuers were able
to dislodge the rock and allow him to slide down to the stream
below.
With some encouragement, Watts was able to crawl out of
the squeeze. Rescuers gave him food and water, and then
helped him exit the cave. He reached the surface at about 6:00
a.m. Sunday morning. He was treated for hypothermia, but
was otherwise uninjured.
Michael Koryta, "Man rescued after 17 hours in cave,"
Bloomington Herald-Times, 19 May 2003.


********** 19 May
unspecified ice cave near Kalispell, Montana
caver fall, inadequate equipment
Roderick Dye (23) was climbing down a makeshift ladder
to enter an ice cave near Kalispell when he slipped and fell.
Dye, who was reported to weigh about 200 pounds,
plummeted 30 feet, struck a ledge, and then fell an additional
15 feet before becoming wedged between the walls. He was

---------- Page 32 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
suspended partway down a shaft believed to be 200 to 300 feet
deep.
One of Dye's companions had a cell phone, and used it to
call for help. Rescuers from several teams and agencies
worked together to rig a haul system and extract Dye from the
shaft. He was trapped for about two hours, but was uninjured.
Richard Rhinehart, "Illinois Girl's Death May Close Utah
Cave, Rocky Mountain Caving, v20n1, Winter 2003, p. 6.
Comments: It is not clear whether Dye was using some sort of
homemade ladder or whether he was trying to cut steps in the
ice. In either case, it would have been better to rig a rope and
rappel the drop.


********** 25 May
Minotaur Cave, Washington
lost
Chris Molyneux (36) took his wife, Michelle, and their
three children (ages 7, 4, and 18 months) up to the mountains
for a day in the outdoors, planning to visit some small lava
tube caves. The older children had accompanied him on an
earlier visit to Ape Cave, and had asked to go caving again.
Molyneux decided to try a visit to Ice Rink Cave. Using a
GPS receiver and coordinates for the cave, he drove to a
parking spot about 200 yards from the entrance, parked, and
led the group to a sink with a cave entrance. The cave map
indicated that there were several entrances, and Molyneux was
not sure which one he had found. He decided to go in a short
distance to make sure that the passage was suitable for the
children, and to try to determine which entrance it was.
Donning his helmet and light, Molyneux entered the cave.
He did not take his cave pack, but was wearing a fanny pack
containing two backup lights, spare batteries for his headlamp,
and a map of the cave. After about 100 feet Molyneux came to
an apparent end. An 18-inch high crawl led to the right.
Studying the map, he decided that the passage looked more or
less like part of Ice Rink Cave near the west entrance. It
appeared that he could pop through the crawl, travel a short
distance through the cave, and come out at the main entrance
with the eponymous ice deposit.
Molyneux crawled through the opening into larger passage
leading both left and right. He headed off to the left, believing
the main entrance to be in that direction. After walking for
some time, he came to a section of breakdown not indicated
on the map. Wondering whether he had somehow missed the
entrance, he squeezed through. Finally, he came to what
appeared to be a collapsed entrance, completely plugged by
dirt fill.
Deciding that he was not in Ice Rink Cave after all,
Molyneux turned around and started back the way he had
come. He squeezed back through the breakdown and made his
way back along the larger passage. After several hundred feet,
he found himself at what appeared to be another collapsed
entrance. It looked suspiciously like the one he had just left.
He marked an 'X' in the dirt, and turned once again. After
traveling about 400 feet, he found himself once again at the
'X'-marked spot.
Having now realized that the passage made a 400-foot long
loop, Molyneux decided to carefully search the outer wall of
the passage all the way around, looking for the opening to the
crawl. Another circumnavigation yielded no result. It occurred
to him that he had been in the cave for quite a while, and that
his wife would be worried. Perhaps she would decide to go for
help. As he contemplated this, Molyneux realized that he had
the vehicle keys in his pocket.
Molyneux decided to make another traversal of the loop,
this time scouring the inner wall. This also failed, and he sat
down to rest and think. He had searched the passage carefully,
leaving pieces torn from the cave map to mark dead ends and
other features. He was sure that he had entered the cave at the
opposite side of the loop from the collapsed entrance. He
returned to that area and made another search, but found
nothing.
After several hours and five or six passes around the loop,
Molyneux began to question his assumptions and his
recollection of the cave. Perhaps he had erred in focusing his
attention on the far side of the loop, away from the collapsed
entrance. Beginning once more at the dirt fill, and staying low,
he found the obscure opening about 50 feet down the passage.
Apparently, when he had entered the cave he had turned left
and gone almost completely around the loop before
encountering the collapsed entrance. Not realizing this, he had
formed the impression that the crawl must be on the far side of
the loop.
Molyneux scrambled through the crawl and out of the
cave. He had been underground for about five hours. In the
meantime, his wife had indeed become concerned, and
decided to take the children and hike back up the road to seek
assistance. She managed to hitch a ride to a Forest Service
station staffed by two interns, where she explained the
situation and asked for help. After calling the Sheriff's office
to request assistance, they returned to the cave, arriving just as
Molyneux emerged. The cave was subsequently surveyed and
named Minotaur Cave.
Chris Molyneux, "Very Bad Cave Trip," 27 May 2003.
Comments: The perils of solo caving - need we say more?
Molyneux's wife had called to him at the entrance and blown
a whistle repeatedly, but he was too far into the cave to hear.
She could not leave the small children alone to enter the cave
and search for him, and had little choice but to seek assistance
when he failed to return. Molyneux observes that since his
wife and children were his caving partners, "I should never
have gone anywhere that they couldn't follow, and I shouldn't
have gone beyond voice contact range." He also suggests that
three adults should be considered a safe minimum when taking
children caving.


********** 25 May
Tongue River Cave, Wyoming
caver fall
A man was rescued from Tongue River Cave after he fell
about 14 feet in the entrance room, breaking his leg near the
hip. The man was with two companions, and had entered the
cave to take shelter from a rain storm. Members of the
Sheridan Area Search and Rescue team carried him out of the
cave and down to rescue vehicles waiting in the canyon below.

---------- Page 33 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
1. "Man breaks leg in Tongue River Cave," Casper Star
Tribune, 28 May 2003.
2. Richard Rhinehart, "Illinois Girl's Death May Close Utah
Cave," Rocky Mountain Caving, v20n1, Winter 2003, p. 6.
Comments: Rescuers were again called to the cave two days
later when two teens were reported overdue from a caving trip.
The rescue was called off when the boys turned up on their
own.


********** 26 May
Two Door Cave, Hawaii
stranded in sea cave
Four Kauai residents became stranded in Two Door Cave
on the Na Pali coast when the inflatable boat they had used to
enter the cave capsized. They managed to signal a passing tour
boat by firing a signal flare from the cave. The boat crew
reported the situation to authorities.
Two lifeguards stationed nearby soon arrived by jet-ski
and attempted to enter the cave. On their first attempt, they
were thrown from their craft by violent surf. Carefully timing
the swells for another attempt, lifeguard Mark McKamey was
able to enter the cave and drop off his partner, Chris Pico. One
by one, the two lifeguards retrieved the stranded explorers and
delivered them to a tour boat that had stopped to help.
Anthony Sommer, "Kauai lifeguards rescue 4 at Two Door
Cave," Honolulu Star-Bulletin, 8 May 2003.


********** 3 June
Lighthouse Cave, California
stranded in sea cave
Two people were rescued from Lighthouse Cave after they
became stranded in the cave by a rising tide. According to a
newspaper report, the unidentified couple, a man and woman
in their mid-20's, were walking along the cliff above the cave
entrance when the woman lost her footing and fell into the
water at the cave entrance. The man then jumped in to try to
help. The tide was rising at the time, with surf height ranging
from three to five feet. The two were able to climb out of the
water onto a ledge in the back of the cave, where they waited
for help.
Firefighters were called to the scene, and used personal
watercraft to ferry two lifeguards into the cave. The lifeguards
were able to swim the stranded beachgoers out to the
watercraft, which took them to a waiting boat.
1. Bill Starrs, "Surf Rescue From a Cave," Santa Cruz Fire
Department, Media release, 3 June 2003.
2. Cathy Redfern, "Couple rescued from Lighthouse Point
sea cave, Santa Cruz Sentinel, 4 June 2003.
Comments: Correspondent Cindy Heazlit reports that the cave
is an easy one, reached by a climb-down from the cliff above
the entrance, but that it can be dangerous when the surf is in.
The deep 'V' shape of the passage amplifies the force of the
waves as they enter the cave.


********** 5 June
Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico
caver fall, climbing without belay
On Thursday morning a group of Boy Scouts from Troop
108 visited Fort Stanton Cave, an eight-mile-long cave
managed by the Bureau of Land Management. The Scouts had
proper clothing and equipment for the trip, including helmets,
lights, knee pads, gloves, and boots, had obtained the
necessary permit for the trip, and were accompanied by
several adult leaders.
At about 2:30 p.m., the Scouts had completed their trip
through the Key Hole and were on their way out of the cave.
While traversing across the top of Three Way Hill they got off
route and found themselves on a balcony overlooking the
Trophy Room. Instead of backtracking to find the easier route,
they opted to climb down from the balcony. Reilly Walker
(14) was climbing down when he slipped and fell, sliding
about 15 to 20 feet and sustaining injuries on impact.
Walker suffered a major laceration to his lower left leg, a
possible broken nose, minor lacerations to his face, arms and
hands, and a twisted ankle. Some of the scouts remained with
Walker while the others exited the cave to call for help, using
the emergency numbers found on the permit.
Personnel from several local emergency service agencies
responded, along with cavers from a local grotto. The first
rescuers reached the accident site around 4:30 p.m. Walker
was approximately two miles from the entrance, and rescuers
realized that more help would be needed to bring him out. The
New Mexico State Police were notified and a rescue mission
was initiated. At about 5:00 p.m., the Southwestern Regional
Coordinator of the NCRC was contacted. He then called in
additional cave rescue resources from several parts of the
state. Around 5:30 p.m., a team with medical personnel and
equipment reached Walker and began treatment.
As more rescuers arrived at the cave, they were formed
into teams and were assigned to tasks such as laying phone
lines, carrying equipment and supplies into the cave, and
rigging ropes at climbs and drops along the evacuation route.
Around 8:30 p.m., three more teams of six rescuers were sent
into the cave to assist with the evacuation. By 11:00 p.m.,
Walker had been packaged in a litter and rescuers had begun
moving him toward the entrance.
The route from the Trophy Room to the entrance goes
through the Hell Hole passage, about 1,700 feet of mostly
hands-and-knees crawling, and then through the Crystal
Crawl, another 800 feet of hands-and-knees crawlway. Three
locations in the cave were rigged with ropes for hauling and
belaying: the Twenty Steps, the Devils Backbone, and the
climb out of the Bridal Chamber.
At about 2:00 a.m., rescuers brought Walker out of the
Hell Hole crawl, and everyone took a break while medics
cleaned Walker's wounds and administered antibiotics and
pain medication. By 3:00 a.m. Walker was re-packaged in the
litter and the evacuation resumed.
From that point the route was primarily walking passage
except for the Crystal Crawl, where the litter was dragged by
tag-line and rope along the smooth, flat, clay floor. Walker
was carried from the cave at approximately 7:30 a.m., placed
in a waiting ambulance, and taken to a hospital for treatment.

---------- Page 34 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
1. Bob Rogers, Incident report, 9 July 2003.
2. Associated Press, "Crew Rescues Injured Scout From
N.M. Cave," ABCNews.com, 6 June 2003.
3. Rick Rhinehart, "Briefly," Rocky Mountain Caving,
v20n2, Spring 2003, p. 6.
Comments: The rescue operation involved more than 50
rescuers from a dozen different organizations. It is a good
example of a serious cave rescue, and demonstrates the
complexity and duration typical of cave rescue operations.
Even though the rescue progressed as quickly as possible, with
no major obstacles such as pits or flooded passages, the first
rescuers did not reach Walker until several hours after his fall,
and it took almost 15 more hours to bring him to the surface.


********** 14 June
Land of the Swirling Mists Cave, Colorado
rockfall entrapment
Shortly after the discovery of the main level of Land of the
Swirling Mists Cave, explorers began searching for new leads
to explore. Many of the cave's passages end in breakdown
piles, and Tom Dawson and Bob Sacco decided to try to dig
up and over one at the south end of the Lobby - the first large
room in the cave. Dawson started moving rocks and digging
up into the breakdown, staying close to the cave ceiling and
away from the larger rocks in the pile. Lying on his side and
reaching up with his right arm, he was able to pull rocks out
and begin making some progress.
Suddenly, a portion of the ceiling above Dawson broke
loose. With a "sick, scraping sound," a 10-inch-thick slab of
rock three feet wide and four feet long settled onto Dawson,
pinning him to the floor. Sacco could see Dawson's legs
sticking out from underneath the slab, and heard his cry for
help. He dug frantically, trying to free his friend. Dawson's
right arm was still above his head, and his left arm was at his
side. He could not move, and felt the slab crushing him as it
slowly continued to drop.
Sacco kept digging, and was able to remove enough dirt
and rock to allow Dawson to shift his position slightly and
move his right arm. As he did so, however, the slab shifted
and its weight came onto his helmet, pinning his head.
Dawson could now move his arm, but his head was stuck,
holding up the rock. Sacco continued to dig, and Dawson
helped as much as he could. He could feel a little space around
his lower body, and realized that he might be able to slide out
from under the slab if he could free his head.
Dawson tried to release the chinstrap on his helmet, but it
was held tight by the pressure. Pinching as hard as he could
Dawson was finally able to release the strap. In a single, swift
motion, he slid out from under the slab, which immediately
settled into the space he had vacated.
Dawson could think of only one thing - to get out of the
cave as quickly as possible. He bolted for the entrance, leaving
his helmet and gear behind. Sacco chased him down the slope
and handed him a light. Dawson stopped only long enough to
take the light and ask Sacco to alert the other cavers in the
cave before continuing his exit.
As he approached the cave entrance, Dawson came to a
hands-and-knees crawlway. When he reached the low point of
the crawl, about halfway through, Dawson realized that he
needed help. His wife, Nancy, was near the entrance of the
cave and heard him call for help. She dragged Dawson by the
collar of his cave suit as he pushed with his feet against the
floor and walls of the crawl. With her assistance, he made it
out of the crawl and through the larger passage to the cave
entrance.
While Dawson made his way down the hillside to his car,
his wife ran ahead to get their cell phone and call for an
ambulance. When Dawson reached the car, she drove him
down to the visitor's center, where the ambulance picked him
up and took him to a hospital for treatment. Dawson suffered
several broken ribs, internal bleeding, a separated shoulder,
and other injuries, and underwent extensive rehabilitation
therapy after the accident.
Thomas Dawson, "Trapped: A Narrow Escape in Swirling
Mists, Rocky Mountain Caving, v20n4, Autumn 2003, p. 24.


********** 16 June
Boundary Cave, Carter Caves SP, Kentucky
fatality, flood entrapment
Allen Booth (22) and two teen-age companions went to
Boundary Cave, a small cave near the northeastern boundary
of Carter Caves State Park, on a rainy Monday afternoon. Two
and a half inches of rain had fallen, and park officials had
stopped issuing cave permits earlier in the afternoon due to
concern over the potential for flooding. The cavers did not go
into the visitor's center, however, and were unaware of this.
They entered the cave at about 4:00 p.m., despite the weather
conditions and the presence of an active stream flowing into
the entrance.
They had gone less than 50 feet into the cave when they
realized that the water was rising and turned to leave. Before
they could exit, however, the passage was flooded by the
rapidly rising stream. The two teens were able to pull
themselves out of the cave, but Booth did not make it out. His
companions made their way to the visitor's center, about two
miles away, and alerted park rangers.
Rescue personnel were called to the park, but by the time
one of the teens led them to the cave area, darkness had fallen
and he was unable to find the entrance. Rescuers spent the
night searching all the caves and sinks in the area. Booth's
body was found the next morning, about 150 feet inside the
cave.
1. Andy Mead, "Caver drowns in Carter, Lexington Herald-
Leader, 18 June 2003.
2. Associated Press, "Michigan man drowns in cave during
heavy rains," www.FOX41.com, 17 June 2003.
3. Allen Blair, "Missing caver found dead,' Ashland Daily
Independent, 18 June 2003.
4. George Dasher, "Rockin' Chair," West Virginia Caver,
v21n4, August 2003, p. 9.
Comments: Many experienced cavers feel that water is the
most dangerous element in caving. It should never be
underestimated. According to the reports, the park officials
were not certain whether the cave is inside or outside the park
boundary.

---------- Page 35 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 21 June
War Eagle Cave, Alabama
stranded, difficulty on rope
Jennifer Keeling (mid-20's) became stranded on rope
when she was unable to climb past the overhanging lip of the
137-foot entrance drop at War Eagle Cave. Scott Shaw tried
for about ten minutes to talk her over, but Keeling grew tired
and said, "I need help now."
Zeb Henson clipped on to the rope with a safety ascender,
hung over the top of the pit, and lifted her, removing her
weight from the rope at the lip. Keeling was then able to move
her ascenders past the overhang and finish the climb.
Shaw and Henson found that Keeling's chest harness had
slipped down to her waist, reducing the distance she could step
up with the lower ascender of her Mitchell climbing system.
She simply could not step high enough to get past the lip. She
had not tightened the harness properly at the beginning of the
climb, and it caught on the edge and slid down as she tried to
get past the overhanging lip of the pit.
Scott Shaw, Incident report, 8 July 2003.
Comments: Shaw writes: "Chest harnesses feel tight when
you're on the ground, but can be loose once you're on rope.
Experienced cavers know to check the tightness of their chest
harness after a few steps. This was not done in this case and
caused a bit of trouble."
Vertical cavers should include in their climbing systems an
ascender attached by a cows tail or lanyard to their seat
harness. This is sometimes referred to as a quick attachment
safety, or QAS. When crossing an obstacle such as a difficult
lip, a knot, or a rebelay, the climber can usually reach up and
clip the QAS on the rope above the obstruction, and then sit
down. This transfers the climber's weight to a point above the
obstruction, making it a simple matter to raise or move the
remaining ascenders and climb past the difficult spot.


********** 28 June
Rocky River Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, broken leg
On a Saturday morning a group of nine cavers entered and
explored Rocky River Cave. After descending two small rope
drops and exploring to the sump, the group started back out.
While negotiating the stream passage in the rear of the cave,
Brian Wilson stepped onto a ledge which suddenly collapsed.
He fell about three feet and landed on his left leg with the full
weight of his six-foot, two-inch, 200-pound frame, plus cave-
pack and water-soaked wetsuit and cave suit. Wilson's leg
buckled and he went down.
It was immediately clear that Wilson's leg was severely
injured and would not support his weight. One of the other
cavers in the group was an EMT, and two were physicians.
They examined Wilson and decided that he might be able to
limp out with assistance if they could splint and immobilize
the injured leg. Several of the cavers started out to retrieve
rescue equipment from their vehicles and alert the cave rescue
team in case assistance was required.
The two doctors splinted Wilson's leg with a pair of
adjustable trekking poles, knee pads and lots of duct tape.
When he was pronounced ready to travel, the cavers helped
Wilson toward the first drop via the lower stream passage SO
that he could float as much as possible. Using pulleys and
ascenders, the cavers rigged a 3:1 haul system and pulled
Wilson up the first pit, then repeated the process at the second
pit. All members of the group then helped Wilson hop and
drag himself toward the entrance.
The entrance sink has been used as a trash dump for many
years, and the cavers had to help Wilson make his way
between discarded appliances and other debris. The sloping
side of the sink was muddy and slippery, SO Wilson was
carried out with a combination of the fireman's carry and "a
homebrew uphill Tyrolean traverse." He reached the surface
about six hours after his fall, and was driven to a hospital for
treatment. An X-ray Saturday night and CT-scan Sunday
showed a broken tibial plateau and a fractured fibula. Wilson
underwent surgery to repair the damage.
Troy Fox, Incident report, 30 June 2003.
Comments: Fox writes: "This could have been a truly
miserable time for us all, but thanks to having cavers present
trained in medicine and in NCRC techniques the rescue went
well and quickly. Brian's determination to hop out rather than
wait for a full rescue with a litter helped to get him to an ER
quickly."


********** 3 July
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
caver fall
Cathy Borer (38), Art Fortini, Ron Miller, and Daniel
Chailloux were returning to camp after a long day of
exploration and survey in the Promised Land, a newly
discovered area at the western edge of Lechuguilla Cave,
when they stopped for a rest at the Keel Haul. Shortly after the
cavers resumed their journey through the Western Borehole,
Borer lost her footing as she stepped down and somersaulted
about 12 feet down a steep rock slab. As she fell, her elbow
became caught between two boulders and was injured. She
came to rest on a 3-foot wide boulder-covered ledge at the top
of a second, steeper drop of about 30 feet.
Borer felt pain in her arm and elbow, and the cavers
suspected that she had suffered a fracture, in addition to
bruises and abrasions. Fortini, an EMT, bandaged her wounds
and fashioned a sling for her arm. The other three cavers
carried Borer's pack and gear as she made her way back to
camp. There, the cavers cleaned and re-dressed Borer's
wounds and applied a SAM splint to her arm. They had been
up for about 28 hours, and decided to get some sleep before
starting out of the cave. Borer was able to leave the cave under
her own power, carrying a light pack.
1. Ron Miller, Incident report, undated.
2. Joe Davis, "Accident Narrative for Cathy Borer,
Volunteer, July 2003.
3. Art Fortini, "Trip report for exploration performed
6/28/03-7/6/03, Carlsbad Caverns National Park, 24 July
2003.
Comments: Borer could not recall exactly what precipitated
her fall. She was traveling at the rear of the group, and the

---------- Page 36 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
others did not see it. Miller writes that fatigue may have been
a factor, since they were on the way back to camp from a very
remote section of the cave. They had been camped
underground for several days, and had adopted a schedule of
30- to 36-hour "days" between sleep periods. Davis notes that
Borer was wearing appropriate footwear, and that her helmet
and backpack protected her during the fall and prevented more
serious injuries.


********** 13 July
Climax Cave, Georgia
fatality, drowned while free-diving sump
Bruce Brewer (33) entered Climax Cave at about 11:00
a.m. on Saturday morning, leading a group of seven other
cavers from a nearby ecological research center on a routine
tour of the cave. Brewer had been in the cave more than 100
times, and had led dozens of groups on the same trip over the
years. The other members of the group were novice or first-
time cavers. The cave is home to a large colony of bats, and
the visitors hoped to make some recordings of their calls and
sounds.
The standard tour, known as "the loop" to those familiar
with the cave, involves several thousand feet of crawling and
walking through a series of rooms connected by smaller
passages. After spending about nine hours in the cave, the
group was in a room known as Razor Hall, named for a
formation suspended above a deep pool. On one side of the
room, a natural partition hangs down above the pool and
separates the room from an adjacent chamber known as the
Turnage Room.
When the pool level is low, cavers can enter the pool and
swim under the partition, or crawl around a narrow ledge at
the edge of the pool to pass from one room to the other. On
this particular day, the water level was higher than normal due
to recent heavy rainfall, and Brewer told the others that he had
never seen it SO high. There was no airspace visible at the
partition. Brewer told the group to wait while he entered the
pool to try to determine whether the route to the Turnage
Room was passable. He swam toward the partition, held his
breath, and submerged.
The other cavers waited for several minutes, but Brewer
did not return. Thinking that he might have surfaced on the
other side of the partition, they continued to wait. After a
while, they turned out their lights to conserve batteries. When
they did so, they noticed a glow coming from underneath the
partition. Some of the cavers climbed into the pool, holding on
to those at the edge, and tried to feel around under the water
and reach for Brewer, but they could not locate him in the
deep water. They decided that they should leave the cave and
get help. Working together to find the route, they made their
way to the surface, where they contacted authorities at 11:30
p.m.
Sheriff's deputies arrived quickly, but soon realized that
they needed help. They contacted local caver Will Summer,
who knew the cave and came to assist. At about 2:30 a.m.,
Summer and two divers from the Sheriff's department
accompanied the cavers back to the pool, where the divers
found Brewer's body in about 10 to 12 feet of water. They
retrieved him from the pool, but realized that they needed help
to bring him out of the cave. The group returned to the surface
at about 7:30 a.m., and authorities began to assemble
personnel and equipment for the recovery.
Rescuers, including cavers and other volunteers, arrived
throughout the day. In a 13-hour effort, more than 130 people
worked though the ensuing night to bring Brewer's body to
the surface. The effort was hampered by small passages and
constrictions in the cave, some of which were enlarged using
portable air-hammers and chisels. Brewer's body reached the
surface at about 4:19 a.m. on Monday morning.
1. Kim McCoy, "Explorer dies in cave's depth, Tallahassee
Democrat, 14 July 2003.
2. Gerald Ensley, "More than 100 take part in arduous
recovery, Tallahassee Democrat, 15 July 2003.
3. Melanie Yeager, "Cavers emphasize attention to safety,"
Tallahassee Democrat, 15 July 2003.
4. Paul Aughey, Incident report, 15 July 2003.
Comments: Some cavers who frequent Climax Cave
reportedly engage in a practice they refer to as "sumping" -
free-diving in the cave pools from one chamber or air bell to
another. Some consider the practice to be safe and fun. In this
case it was neither.


********** 19 August
Bear Cave, Pennsylvania
lost
Charles A. Miller, two other adults, and seven Boy Scouts
from Troop 92 arrived at the Bear Cave parking lot at about
10:00 a.m., planning to spend the day exploring the cave. At
5:00 p.m., cave owners Tom and Kim Metzgar arrived after
work to go to the entrance area and scrub off graffiti that
vandals had painted at the entrance a few days before. As they
approached the cave, Kim Metzgar encountered the
disoriented group near the entrance and led them to the cave.
Some Scouts drank from the cave stream, reporting that they
had run out of water several hours before.
The Scouts then proceeded to pull out six-foot lengths of
twine, weave an end through the belt loops of their jeans, and
attach the ends to their hardhats in order to hold the hardhats
on their heads. They all had flashlights. The Metzgars warned
the group that the property closes at dusk, and offered them a
ride down the hill if they were out by 8:00 p.m. While the
Metzgars scrubbed graffiti, their dog Barton, snuck into the
cave with the Scouts.
Since they had come to do clean-up work at the entrance,
the Metzgars had no caving gear with them. When 8:00 p.m.
arrived with no sign of the Scouts, Kim Metzgar left to carry
equipment back to the Jeep, and prepared to head down the
hill to get her caving gear in the event the Scouts did not
emerge. Tom Metzgar waited until 8:30 p.m., and then entered
the cave dressed in shorts, t-shirt and tennis shoes, with only a
mini-mag flashlight
About half-way through the maze, he heard the Scouts,
from a distance, arguing about which way to go. Not wanting
to go through Backbreaker Pass with only shorts and t-shirt
on, Metzgar whistled softly for Barton. The dog took off
toward his master and some Scouts followed, against the

---------- Page 37 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
advice of the leader. Then the whole troop routed, following
the dog.
Metzgar made his way back toward the entrance ahead of
the dog. The lead Scouts only saw the dog, not Metzgar, and
lifted Barton up several ledges and climbs on the way out.
Near the entrance, the dog bolted through the rest of the maze,
leaving the Scouts behind.
When Barton and Metzgar reached the entrance, there was
no sign of the Scouts following them. A bear in the area scared
the dog back into the cave, where he found the Scouts and led
them the rest of the way out.
Kim Metzgar, Incident report, 28 October 2003.
Comments: Metzgar writes: "Group leader Charles Miller said
he had visited the cave a number of years ago, but the "trails
had changed," thus leading to his inability to find the entrance.
Concerned that the disoriented troop would have trouble
finding their way out of the cave, since they couldn't find it in
the first place, the Metzgars stuck around to assist in their exit.
Fortunately, they were on hand to scrub graffiti
(unfortunately), or the troop might have been lost in the cave
for a longer period of time. The six-foot lengths of twine to
hold their hardhats on were a novel idea never seen at Bear
Cave before. The Scouts were given safe caving information
and asked to go with a local grotto if they returned."


********** 24 August
Hubbards Cave, Colorado
lost, stranded, inadequate equipment
Local residents Sherry DeCrow (49) and John Hadar (54)
were reportedly stranded for more than four days in Hubbards
Cave when their flashlights failed while they were exploring
about 400 feet from the entrance. According to published
reports, they entered the cave on Sunday afternoon, leaving
their Suburban parked at the trailhead. Unfortunately, they had
not told anyone of their plans to visit the cave, and were not
missed for some time.
By Tuesday morning, members of DeCrow's family had
become concerned when they were unable to reach her. Some
members reportedly thought that the pair had eloped; others
worried that something more serious had occurred. On
Tuesday evening, they called the Sheriff to request assistance.
Authorities began an investigation, which was soon
colored by the suggestion that DeCrow's ex-husband might be
vengeful and violent. On Wednesday, county officials
requested assistance from the Air National Guard, and a
helicopter flew over the area searching in vain for any sign of
DeCrow, Hadar, or their vehicle. Family members were not
satisfied with the search, and persuaded a family friend to fly
over the area in his plane on Thursday, using DeCrow's house
as a starting point. About 30 minutes into the search, the pilot
spotted the Suburban and reported its location.
Deputies went to the trailhead where they secured and
flagged off the Suburban, treating the area as a potential crime
scene. A search dog brought to the vehicle led officers to the
cave entrance. Deputies shouted into the entrance of the cave,
but reportedly did not search it thoroughly, and did not find
the stranded duo. Family members and friends of the missing
pair offered to enter the cave, but deputies would not allow
them, citing safety concerns. As thunderstorms moved into the
area, officials suspended the search and sent everyone home.
On Friday morning, everyone returned to the cave and
deputies allowed the family members to enter. DeCrow and
Hadar were located in a matter of minutes, and escorted from
the cave. An altercation erupted between family members and
some of the deputies, with family members accusing the
deputies of hampering the search and delaying the rescue.
Hadar and DeCrow were examined by medical personnel,
and reported to be in good condition, despite having spent
more than four days without food or water in the 35-degree
cave. Family members later told reporters that the two were
weak and dehydrated. They declined further medical attention
and left in the Suburban, and were reported to have checked
into a local hotel for recuperation.
1. Rick Rhinehart, "Hubbard's Cave Site of Bizarre
'Rescue', Rocky Mountain Caving, v20n3, Summer 2003,
p. 7.
2. David Frey, "Couple rescued from cave, Denver Post, 31
August 2003.
3. "Locals found after four days in Hubbard Cave,"
Glenwood Springs Post Independent, 31 August 2003.
4. "Pair rescued after four days in cave," Casper Star
Tribune, 31 August 2003.
Comments: One of the basic safety rules of caving is to let
someone know where you are going and when you expect to
be out of the cave. Another basic rule is that each caver should
carry three sources of light, as well as spare parts and extra
batteries or carbide. A third rule is to carry some food, water,
and extra clothing. Note that there is no mention of the
expected trip length in these rules.
There was some speculation that Hadar and DeCrow were
never actually stranded in the cave, and that they had gone in
via another entrance early Friday morning and staged their
rescue. Family members denied this, and insisted that the
Sheriff's department had mismanaged the incident, leaving the
two stranded much longer than necessary. The Sheriff was
reported to have said that he was aware of cave rescue
resources in the region, and that they were not brought in
because officials "had no reason to presume they were lost in a
cave."


********** 27 September
Omega System, Virginia
fatality, caver fall while rappelling
On Saturday, September 27, a crew consisting of Mike
Ficco, Andrea Futrell, Mike Futrell, Dick Graham (59), Sue
Setzler, Ron Simmons, and Steve Wells entered the Lori Cori
Canyon Cave entrance to the Omega System in Wise County,
Virginia. A routine survey trip had been planned.
Everything proceeded normally as the group climbed down
the entrance, and then crawled, climbed, and chimneyed down
to the top of a 90-foot pit. The drop was rigged with an 11-
millimeter PMI static caving rope.
When Graham began his descent of the pit, Setzler was at
the top of the pit. For about the first ten feet at the top while
Setzler could see him, Graham rappelled very slowly. Setzler
heard him exclaim, "Man! This rope is really slow. I'm really

---------- Page 38 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
having to feed it a lot." Setzler looked over and could see him
pulling up the rope to feed it, but she did not take any
particular note of his rappel device and assumed he was using
a rack. Actually, Graham was using a bobbin 'simple'
descender, attached to a triangular maillon on his seat harness
with an oval maillon or "quick link."
Graham wrestled with his bobbin as he rappelled down the
pit. His voice was clear and Setzler could see the rock lit up by
his light, SO he was probably just out of her sight. The drop is
free at that point. Setzler heard Graham say, "Hold on a
minute, I have to make an adjustment." He paused for a couple
of minutes and then finished his rappel without further
comment. Setzler followed him down the drop.
A few hundred feet farther, beyond some tight drops and
difficult passage, there is a 213-foot drop. This pit was also
rigged with 11-millimeter PMI. At the top of the pit, cavers
clip in to a traverse line to approach the drop, and rig for
rappel while standing or kneeling on a very slick sloping shelf
approximately four feet wide. A heavy pad was in place at the
lip to protect the rope.
From the lip, the rope hangs free to the bottom, but for
several dozen feet the rope hangs just a few inches away from
the wall, gradually increasing to a distance of several feet. By
the midpoint of the drop, the wall is eight to ten feet away. At
that point a flowstone shelf rolls out and comes within two
inches of the free-hanging rope. Below the flowstone are some
nice draperies; below them the wall gradually recedes again to
a distance of about ten feet at the bottom of the pit.
The narrow passage leading to the 213-foot pit requires a
group to spread out along the passage while approaching the
drop and waiting to descend. Andrea Futrell was in the lead,
and elected to go first. Futrell talked to Graham briefly at the
top of the pit, stating that her micro-rack was very slow on the
stiff, muddy rope. Graham commented about his own
descending gear, saying, "This thing seems to be working
pretty well SO far."
Futrell descended the pit and called, "Off rope." Mike
Ficco waited as Graham rigged in. Graham began his rappel in
a normal fashion and Ficco watched the reflected light from
his lamp begin to fade as he descended. Ficco estimates that
Graham had rappelled about 20 to 30 feet, when he heard
Graham say, "No, No!" This was immediately followed by a
very loud "Boom-BOOM," which was heard by all,
presumably a result of Graham first hitting the flowstone shelf
followed by the floor of the shaft. Instantly, Futrell began
yelling for Graham as she raced down and over to the bottom
of the drop from the waiting area in an alcove about 100 feet
away.
Futrell found Graham on the floor of the pit about 25 feet
from the bottom of the rope, completely detached from the
rope. He had been killed in the fall. With great difficulty she
communicated that Graham was dead and that someone else
should come down, carefully observing the rope and ledge.
Ficco was ready and descended next. He confirmed
Futrell's observations. Graham's bobbin descender was
attached to his harness but open. His safety ascender was
attached to his seat harness by a carabiner, but was not
otherwise clipped in to his harness. The rest of his gear
appeared normal. Futrell and Ficco did not observe any
evidence of rock fall.
Stunned and in disbelief, the cavers made their way back
out of the cave and hiked back to their vehicles in a raging
thunderstorm. They drove to the sheriff's office to report the
accident and initiate a call for assistance.
Cavers and rescue teams from around the region
responded, traveling to the site during the night and preparing
to enter the cave on Sunday morning. After a 24-hour effort,
Graham's body was brought to the surface at about 11:00 a.m.
Monday morning.
1. Andrea Futrell and Bill Storage, "Lori Cori Cave Accident
Analysis, NSS News, v63n6, June 2005.
2. Mike Ficco, Andrea Futrell, Mike Futrell, Sue Setzler, Ron
Simmons, and Steve Wells, Incident report, 3 October
2003.
3. O'Donna Ramsey, "North Carolina man killed while
exploring cave on High Knob, The Coalfield Progress, 30
September 2003.
4. Clifford Jeffrey, "North Carolina man dies in fall at cave
near Norton, Kingsport Times-News, 30 September
2003.
Comments: In addition to being published in the NSS News,
Futrell and Storage's full report is available on the web at
www.bstorage.com/speleo/LoriCoriAccident The analysis is
very thorough, and suggests several scenarios that could have
resulted in Graham's bobbin descender opening and becoming
detached from the rope. Included with the on-line and
published versions are photographs of Graham's equipment in
the configuration that he is believed to have been using when
the accident occurred.
It appears that Graham's bobbin descender came open
while he was on rappel. There is no way to determine whether
he failed to close and latch it completely, or whether it was
opened by the twisting and movement of the bobbin and the
maillon link and carabiner he had used to attach it to his seat
harness. In either case, when the bobbin latch is not closed and
latched, the side plate can swing up and allow the rope to
escape from the device, detaching the rappeller from the rope.
Feeding or forcing the rope into the bobbin, as Graham was
observed doing, can exacerbate the problem. Users of bobbin-
style descenders should read Storage and Futrell's analysis
carefully, study the photographs, and examine their own
equipment and techniques.
Some bobbins, such as the Petzl Simple, can be secured
against accidental opening by clipping a second carabiner
through the attachment eye. Many cavers incorporate a single
or double cows tail in their vertical system, and clip the ends
of these cows tails to the side of their harness while rappelling.
Clipping one into the bobbin instead offers added security
without requiring and extra carabiner.
Maillons or quick links should not be used to attach
descenders of this type. A locking carabiner made from large
diameter bar stock is the recommended method. For those
whose harness design uses a maillon link for closure and for
the primary attachment point, the semicircular or "demi-rond"
maillon is a better choice than the triangular maillon. It is less
likely to cause binding of carabiners, cows tails, and ascenders
attached to it as part of the climbing or rappelling system.
In experiments conducted by ACA committee members
with bobbins of several designs, we found that twisting of the
carabiner or maillon used to attach the bobbin to a seat harness

---------- Page 39 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
can, in some cases, open the latch on the bobbin gate and
allow the side plate to un-latch and swing open. The way in
which this happens is similar to the way that a carabiner and
the attachment eye of a rappel rack or figure eight descender
can be twisted to force the carabiner gate open. Clearly, cavers
must pay close attention to the attachment and orientation of
their rappel device, especially when crossing lips or rebelays.
Futrell and Storage note that Graham published an article
about bobbins in the Safety and Techniques column of the
March 1982 NSS News. In the article, Graham mentions
trading his used rappel rack to Philippe Crochet for a used
bobbin during the pre-Congress camp of the 1981
International Congress of Speleology in Kentucky. The bobbin
Graham used for the Lori Cori Canyon Cave trip had "PC"
engraved on it. It appears that it is the same bobbin he
acquired from Crochet in 1981.
It should be noted that the descender that Graham was
using was more than 20 years old, and that the manufacturer
has improved the design in a number of ways over the last two
decades. In particular, the gate design has been improved to
resist accidental opening. Cavers should consider retiring old
equipment (especially vertical gear) and upgrading to current
versions in order to take advantage of improvements in utility
and safety.
The use of bobbins and mini-racks has become more
popular in the US in recent years, but many users report
problems with the devices when using stiff or muddy ropes,
especially in the larger diameters, such as 11 millimeter. These
devices do not have the same degree of friction variability as
the full-size rack, and it is often necessary for the rappeller to
feed the rope, especially at the start of a long rappel. Feeding
or forcing the rope into the device during a rappel can result in
various problems, including, under some circumstances, loss
of control or even detachment from the rope.
The problem is exacerbated for lighter cavers, who need
more variability (e.g. a six-bar rack) rather than less. Cavers
should choose a descending device and technique which
allows a smooth, controlled descent in actual cave conditions.
The type of rope and rigging to be used must be considered as
well.
One manufacturer of bobbin-type descenders, Petzl,
includes in its instructions for the devices a caution against the
use of maillons or non-locking carabiners to attach the
descender to the seat harness, recommending instead a locking
oval carabiner. Maillons are a particular problem, because the
relatively short minor axis dimension makes it relatively easy
for them to open the bobbin gate when twisted in a certain
way. Some of the lightweight locking 'D' carabiners currently
favored by climbers are also unsuitable for use with these
devices for similar reasons.
The size of the rod stock from which the maillon or
carabiner is made is also an issue. In our experiments, we
found that maillons and carabiners made from 10 millimeter or
smaller diameter rod or bar stock were more likely to open the
bobbin gate when twisted than those made from larger
diameter stock.


********** 27 September
Nellies Cave, Virginia
rockfall
Fred Grady was working with a group of about a dozen
cavers engaged in a clean-up at Nellies Cave when he was
struck on the right side of the neck and shoulder by a rock
weighing approximately five pounds. The cavers were using
ropes to haul trash up several small drops in the cave, and the
activity had apparently dislodged the rock.
Grady was knocked to the floor by the impact, dazed but
conscious. Another caver rushed to his aid. Grady knew he
had been injured, but was not sure how badly. He was able to
exit the cave with some assistance from other cavers.
Grady had suffered an abrasion on his neck and a large
bruise on his right shoulder. After inspecting the damage, he
decided that the injuries were not serious and did not seek
medical attention. His neck and shoulder were sore for about a
week.
Fred Grady, Incident report, undated.
Comments: Grady reports that, during the clean-up work,
smaller rocks had been falling almost constantly as trash was
dragged against the cave walls. Earlier, a tire being hauled out
had been dropped from above, narrowly missing several
participants. Grady suggests that better placement of the ropes
used to haul the trash might have helped prevent the accident.
Whether cleaning or caving, cavers should be careful to
stay out of the fall zone below drops. If something should fall,
yell "Rock!" - even if the object is actually a tire.


********** 25 October
Bear Cave, Pennsylvania
lost, inadequate equipment
Chris Duncan (26), Megan Duncan (19), Dan Mills (20),
and Keri Shipley (21) entered Bear Cave on a Saturday
morning. The four, dressed in jeans, t-shirts and sweatshirts,
were not well prepared for their trip, with only cloth caps as
headgear, and one light each. They had no cave packs with
extra gear, warm clothing, food or water.
NSS member Bob Eppley, a friend of the owners, was in
the cave with his daughter and son-in-law, and his three
grandchildren, and encountered the four spelunkers at about
4:00 p.m. Observing their lack of equipment, Eppley lectured
the spelunkers about wearing helmets with proper lighting and
carrying backup lights. He also warned them about the
maziness of the cave and told them that they should go with
someone who was familiar with the cave. One of the female
members of the group told Kathy Jennings, Eppley's daughter,
that she had already hit her head several times.
Bear Cave is open to properly-equipped cavers from dawn
to dusk. Cal Smith, uncle of Kim Metzgar, one of the owners,
keeps an eye on the parking area for the cave. Smith and his
wife were away all day Saturday, however, and arrived home
very late. On Sunday morning when he awakened, Smith
noticed that a car from the previous day was still in the
parking lot. He called cave owners Tom and Kim Metzgar,
who arrived at the parking lot within 45 minutes to begin a
preliminary search of the area.

---------- Page 40 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
The Metzgars found the foursome a few hundred yards
outside the cave entrance (which is about a mile and a half
from the parking lot). One girl was crying and said that they
had spent 22 hours lost in the cave and that they were severely
dehydrated. They were escorted off the ridge by Tom Metzgar,
who, after talking to the "leader," determined that the man had
visited the parking area and kiosk the week before and even
picked up a brochure that lists the proper equipment and gear,
along with references to NSS grottos in the area.
Kim Metzgar, Incident report, 28 October 2003.
Comments: Metzgar writes: "The 'leader' had picked up a
'caving safely' brochure the week before, and the group was
lectured by Eppley while in the cave. Yet they insisted on
continuing further into the network maze cave instead of
following an experienced group out and coming back later
with a grotto. They were asked not to return."


********** 17 November
unspecified lava tube near Kailua, Hawaii
flood entrapment
Maui resident Michael Gingerich and four other men were
exploring a lava tube off the Hana highway near Kailua when
a sudden rainstorm caused a flash flood. A large stream
formed, flowing into the entrance and blocking their exit. As
the entrance flooded, Gingerich and another man managed to
swim underwater and pull themselves through the entrance to
safety, but the other three men remained trapped in the cave.
Fire and rescue personnel responded to the call for help,
arriving at the scene shortly after 4:00 p.m. They found the
cave entrance completely flooded, with no sign of the trapped
men. They also discovered about two dozen hikers, including
several children, stranded on the far side of the flooded
stream.
With only a few hours of daylight remaining, rescuers
focused on retrieving the stranded hikers. They felt that the
high water made the cave entrance too dangerous to enter, and
were uncertain whether the men were still near the entrance or
had been swept downstream in the strong current. A helicopter
equipped with a rescue basket was used to retrieve the
stranded hikers, two at a time, and ferry them to a landing
zone near the highway.
At about 10:00 p.m., officials called off the search efforts
for the night. Friends and family members of the missing men
were not satisfied, however, and went to a store to get
flashlights and glow sticks, intending to continue the search
themselves.
When they returned to the cave, the searchers lit the glow
sticks and tossed them into the water flowing into the cave.
Almost immediately, they heard the trapped men yelling in
response. They were still unable to leave the cave, however,
and were forced to wait several more hours for the flood to
subside. They emerged unharmed after about nine hours
underground.
Gary T. Kubota, "Flash flood strands Maui hikers overnight,
Honolulu Star Bulletin, 19 November 2003.
Comments: Gingerich told reporters that he did not plan to go
into the cave again. "The biggest lesson we learned was the
weather is very volatile out there," he said.


********** 19 November
Sótano de las Golondrinas, SLP, Mexico
fatality, caver fall, lost control on rappel
While rappelling the 1,100-foot entrance drop of Sótano de
las Golondrinas, BASE jumper Dave Flannell (52) lost control
of his rappel device about 400 feet above the floor and fell to
the bottom. He died of injuries sustained on impact.
Flannell was a very experienced BASE jumper and was
visiting the pit with a commercial expedition. He had no prior
caving experience, however, and only a limited amount of
rappelling experience. He had never done a rappel longer than
200 feet before attempting the descent of Golondrinas.
Members of the expedition rappelled into the pit to inspect
and mark the landing zone at the bottom before parachuting
into the pit. A motorized winch had been set up to haul the
members back out after their descents by rope or parachute.
Three members of the expedition made the descent before
Flannell. The first was lowered down the drop using a rappel
rack rigged at the top. Two others elected to rappel, with the
first taking about 20 to 25 minutes and the second taking over
and hour for the descent. Both used brand new 5-bar rappel
racks provided by the expedition organizers.
Flannell also used a 5-bar rack. Like a number of the
participants, he did not wear a helmet. He began his descent
with all five bars engaged. The 1,100 feet of 7/16-inch caving
rope hanging below him in the pit weighed about 60 pounds,
creating a substantial amount of braking force in the rack.
Observers reported seeing him feeding the rope into the rack
during the first 100 to 150 feet of his descent, until he was out
of sight.
Flannell apparently continued to feed the rope into the rack
for some time, and took about 20 to 25 minutes to descend the
first 700 feet of the pit. At that point, the three expedition
members at the bottom heard Flannell yell, and looked up. He
was about 400 feet above the floor and appeared to be in free
fall, lying back in a recumbent position, both hands away from
the rope. The observers did not see him make any attempt to
grab the rope or regain control before striking the bottom.
The others rushed to his aid, but he was unresponsive.
They used a radio to inform those at the top that an accident
had occurred, and began administering first aid and CPR while
another expedition member with medical training was sent
down. He arrived at the bottom about 25 minutes after the
accident, and worked for about 20 more minutes, trying to
revive Flannell, before suspending efforts at resuscitation.
Expedition leader Jay Epstein Ramirez went to Aquismon
and informed authorities of the accident. No trained or
experienced rescue personnel were available in the area, but
police returned to the pit with Ramirez to assist with the body
recovery and conduct an investigation. Flannell's body was
recovered by expedition members using the motorized winch.
1. Bryan Stokes, Incident report, 23 November 2003.
2. Jay Epstein Ramirez, Incident report, 2 December 2003.

---------- Page 41 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports
Comments: Rappelling is an activity that requires training,
especially when descending long drops such as the 1,100-foot
rappel at Golondrinas. Skill and experience in another activity,
such as BASE jumping, does not prepare a person for such a
rappel. Even experienced vertical cavers practice and develop
their skills on smaller pits and drops before tackling a
thousand-foot rappel.
Flannell did not have adequate training and experience to
make the descent safely. His rack was correctly rigged, and all
five bars were still on rope when his equipment was examined
after the accident. When he lost control, he did not know how
to regain it or slow his descent. The reason for the loss of
control remains unknown.
While it is possible to make a safe descent of a 1,100-foot
drop with a 5-bar rappel rack, it is not the best choice for a
drop of that size. Experienced vertical cavers know that longer
drops call for longer racks, SO that the bars may be spread
farther apart in the early stages of the rappel to compensate for
the substantial weight of rope hanging beneath the rappeller
and allow the rappel to proceed smoothly, without the
necessity of pulling up on the rope and feeding it through the
rappel device.
As the rappeller descends and the amount of rope hanging
below decreases, the weight of the rope decreases and the
braking effect of the rappel rack is reduced. The rappeller can
compensate for this by pushing upward on the bars, forcing
them together to increase the friction between the rack and the
rope and slow the rate of descent. A special type of brake bar
known as a "hyperbar" can also be used with a standard rappel
rack to provide additional friction as well as additional
leverage when squeezing the bars together. The hyperbar is
particularly useful for long rappels or for cavers rappelling
with heavy loads suspended below them.
A 6-bar rack with at least 14 inches of bar travel is
recommended for drops in excess of 300 feet. For longer
drops, additional rack length increases the degree of control.
Smaller cavers also benefit from longer rack frames, even on
shorter drops, as the longer frame allows them to spread the
bars farther apart and reduce the braking effect of the rack to a
degree appropriate for their lesser weight.
Inexperienced rappellers are often surprised by the
acceleration than can occur during a long rappel as the rope
weight decreases. Sometimes, they fail to realize the danger
until they are going too fast. This may have been the case
during Flannell's descent. Having spent more than 20 minutes
feeding the rope through the rack and descending the first 700
feet, it is also possible that he became tired and lost his grip
and thus his ability to control the rack.
When a rappeller's rate of descent becomes excessive or
the rappeller loses control and begins to fall, there are several
techniques that may be used to increase friction and slow the
descent. These include jamming the brake bars together,
pulling the rope upwards and passing it over the shoulder and
around the hip, wrapping one's leg repeatedly around the rope,
and calling for a bottom belay. Various types of rappel safety
devices such as a rappel shunt or a prusik safety rigged below
(not above) the rappel device may also be employed to prevent
rapid descent and loss of control.
The effectiveness of a bottom belay is limited by the
amount of rope stretch present on a long drop, and is
dependent upon the timeliness and the force with which it is
applied, but the technique has been used successfully in a
number of incidents to slow and even stop out-of-control
rappels on drops of 600 to 1,200 feet. Cavers should know the
technique and be prepared to use it, especially for novice
rappellers.
Helmets are considered mandatory safety equipment for
vertical caving. They serve not only to protect against injury
from falling rocks or other objects, but to protect the skull in
the event of a fall.


********** 29 November
Wind Cave, New Mexico
stranded in pit, difficulty on rope
Rescuers from the Carlsbad Fire Department, the Bureau
of Land Management, and Carlsbad Caverns National Park
were called to Wind Cave (also known as Hicks Cave) when a
45-year-old woman became stranded on rope at an eight-foot
"nuisance drop" about 175 feet inside the cave. The woman
had reportedly failed to secure her seat harness by doubling
the webbing back through the buckle, and the harness had
slipped down around her thighs, constricting her movement
and circulation. When the woman became exhausted and lost
sensation in her lower legs while struggling to climb the pit,
her companions decided to call for help.
By the time rescuers arrived, the woman had managed to
get off rope and was resting at the bottom of the drop. The
rescuers used a 1:1 "Georgia Haul" to get her up the pit, then
belayed and assisted her as she climbed the rest of the way out
of the cave.
1. "Carlsbad Caverns National Park (NM): Cave Rescue,
The Morning Report, US National Park Service, 3
December 2003.
2. Tom Bemis, Incident report, 12 January 2004.
3. Victoria Parker-Stevens, "Caver rescued," Carlsbad
Current-Argus, 29 November 2003.
4. Associated Press, "Texas woman rescued from cave,"
www.KOBtv.com, 30 November 2003.
5. Richard Rhinehart, "Briefly, Rocky Mountain Caving,
v20n4, Autumn 2003, p. 7.
6. "Cave Rescues, Southwestern Cavers, v41n6, November-
December 2003, p. 77.
Comments: Cavers should be sure to double back or otherwise
secure any buckles on their seat harnesses. Many cavers prefer
harnesses that are secured by a half-round maillon rather than
a buckle. Maillons present their own issues, however, as
demonstrated in the incidents at Hell Below Cave and Sótano
de Cepillo in 2002.
One wonders why the cavers were not able to resolve this
situation themselves, without outside assistance. Cavers
should practice and perfect their vertical skills in a safe
environment outside the cave, and should be capable of
handling an apparently minor incident such as this one.

---------- Page 42 ----------
2003 Caving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 18 December
Hawk Hole, New Mexico
caver fall, descending hand-over-hand
Jason Coon (16) and five companions descended the 70-
foot entrance pit hand-over-hand on a knotted rope tied to a
stake at the entrance. At around sunset, as Coon was climbing
out, he lost his grip and fell approximately 20 to 25 feet back
into the cave, injuring his ankle and lower back. His friends
climbed out and dialed 911 to summon help.
Personnel from Carlsbad Caverns National Park, the
Bureau of Land Management, and the Carlsbad Fire
Department, as well as volunteer rescuers and a number of
state and county officials, were called to the scene. Rescuers
rappelled into the pit to assess Coon's injuries and package
him in a litter, while others rigged a haul system at the top.
The lip area of the pit was very unstable, SO rescuers placed a
tarp over the loose material to reduce rockfall during the
operation. Coon was hauled to the surface and taken to a
hospital for treatment. The rescue was concluded about two
and a half hours after the accident.
1. Tom Bemis, Incident report, 12 January 2004.
2. Jason P. Montoya, "Teenager rescued from cave,"
Carlsbad Current-Argus, 19 December 2003.
3. Richard Rhinehart, "Briefly," Rocky Mountain Caving,
v20n4, Autumn 2003, p. 7.
4. "Cave Rescues, Southwestern Cavers, v41n6, November-
December 2003, p. 77.
Common Caving Mistakes and Consequences
1. Primary light failed; didn't carry backup lights, or backup lights inadequate - stranded.
2. No map, no guide, and poor route-finding skills - lost.
3. Wore inadequate or inappropriate clothing for conditions - hypothermia.
4. Didn't bring extra clothing - hypothermia.
5. Moving but not paying attention - caver fall.
6. Free-climbing more than a body-length without belay - caver fall.
7. Traversing above drop without belay or safety line - caver fall.
8. Ignored rainy weather forecast; entered water cave - flood entrapment or drowning.
9. Careless movement in tight passage or crevice - stuck.
10. Entered bat cave or passage without precautions - histoplasmosis.
11. Solo caving and something went wrong - stranded.
12. Didn't tell anyone where you were going - delayed rescue by hours or days.
13. Vandalized cave formations, gates, or wildlife - criminal prosecution, fines, jail.
14. Didn't clear loose rocks from lip - struck by falling rock.
15. Climbing or descending rope hand-over-hand - lost grip and fell.
16. Climbing cable ladder without belay - fell off.
17. Lost control of rappel; no bottom belay or rappel safety - fell to the bottom.
18. Out of shape or unfamiliar with climbing system - stranded on rope.
19. Didn't know how to change from rappel to climb or from climb to rappel - stranded on rope.
20. Hair or clothing in rappel device; didn't know how to recover - stranded on rope.
21. Rappelling without wearing climbing system - stranded in pit or on rope.
22. Attempted pull-down trip without map or guide - stranded.
23. Sharing vertical gear; lost equipment passing it up or down the pit - stranded.
24. Didn't tie a knot in the end of the rope - rappelled off the end and fell.
25. Moving around lip of pit without being belayed or on rope - fell into pit.
26. Didn't check attachment of rappel device to harness - became detached from rappel device and fell.


********** 31 December
Schlitz Pit, Arkansas
rockfall
Michael Bayona (23) and Mike Sisco (24) led Lois
Wintergreen (46) and Jeff Reed to a new pit they had found,
but not explored. Bayona rappelled into the pit first, stopping
to check several ledges for loose rocks as he descended. Once
down, he provided a bottom belay for Sisco. When Sisco got
off rope, he asked Bayona to belay Wintergreen, while he
looked for passage.
In his excitement at being in a new pit, and because he had
checked for loose rock on the way down, Bayona did not think
about the rockfall danger while belaying Wintergreen, and
stood almost underneath her. When she was about seven feet
from the bottom, Wintergreen put her foot on the edge of a
rock shelf for balance, and the edge of it broke free. A rock
fist-sized rock fell and struck Bayona in the face, resulting in
bruises and a cut near his left eye.
Michael Bayona, Incident report, 23 February 2004.
Comments: Bayona writes: "The excitement of being in a new
pit led to my carelessness. I could have stood elsewhere, away
from the wall, to minimize exposure to rockfall."
The bottom belay is a useful technique, but it is not safe if
the belayer stands in the fall zone. In narrow or unstable pits
where a belayer cannot find a safe location, it would be better
to forego the bottom belay and use a self-belay technique such
as the rappel shunt or prusik safety.

---------- Page 43 ----------
2002 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 16 February
Little River Spring, Florida
fatality, seizure, cause unknown
Pete Reagan (55) and Frank Murphy (43) were diving with
friends in Little River Spring. The group turned their dive
before the Dome Room and started out. Two other divers
made a side trip up Harper Tunnel while Murphy and Reagan
proceeded toward the entrance with Murphy in the lead.
About 500 feet from the entrance Murphy realized that
Reagan was not behind him. He turned back upstream and
found Reagan about 40 feet behind in a state of full body
convulsions. Murphy went to Reagan's aid, and was able to
insert a regulator into Reagan's mouth. Reagan was not
breathing, SO Murphy began forced ventilation using the purge
valve. Reagan began breathing intermittently, but stopped
several times as Murphy towed him toward the entrance,
requiring repeated forced ventilation.
About 30 feet before they reached the entrance, Murphy
ran out of air and began using Reagan's air. As they reached
the entrance, other divers and support personnel helped pull
Reagan from the spring pool. They began CPR and continued
until paramedics arrived to transport Reagan to a hospital. He
never regained consciousness.
1. Susan Lamb, "Little River Springs claims life, Suwannee
Democrat, 20 February 2002.
2. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 17 February 2002.
Comments: Reagan was an experienced and certified cave
diver, with more than 300 logged cave dives.


********** 9 March
Devils Ear Spring, Florida
fatality, lost consciousness, cause unknown
Terri Vichich-Williams (31) entered Devils Ear Spring
with her husband, Alan Williams, and friend Renee Erdman at
about 1:10 p.m. The group planned to make a single-stage
dive up the Main Line, jumping to Hill 400 and leaving stage
bottles at the jump, and then following the Double Lines to the
Ice Palace. They reached their destination without incident and
turned the dive at about 45 minutes, having consumed about
1/3 of their air. They began their exit along the same route.
As the group passed through the Keyhole at about 2:25
p.m., Vichich-Williams went vertical and turned to face her
companions. Erdman reached her first and noticed that she had
switched to a backup regulator. Alan Williams offered her his
regulator but saw that her eyes were closed and she was not
breathing.
The two divers grabbed her harness and swam her out of
the cave. They surfaced at about 2:35 p.m. and called for help.
Several people helped pull the woman from the spring, and
CPR was started while others went to call an ambulance. She
could not be revived.
1. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 9 March 2002.
2. "Maryvillian died during [cave] scuba dive," Knoxville
News-Sentinel, 15 March 2002.
3. Kevin Robinson, "Re: Cave death," Yahoo E-CAVERS


********** discussion group, http://groups.yahoo.com/group/E-
CAVERS/message/1912, 13 March 2002.
Comments: Vichich-Williams was a certified cave diver with
more than 500 logged cave dives. Her tanks were tested and
found to contain 38% oxygen. There was some speculation in
cave-diving discussion groups that oxygen toxicity might have
caused the blackout, and that the 38% oxygen mixture might
have been too rich for the dive. The other divers using the
same mixture reported no ill-effects.


********** 15 June
Bat Colon Cave, Florida
aid, no injury, stranded, lost guideline
Mark Orr (26) and three fellow divers came to Florida
looking for a cave to dive. All were certified open-water
divers, but none had any cave diving training or certification.
Shortly after entering the cave, the divers stirred up the silt
and lost visibility. Orr became disoriented and lost contact
with the other divers and with the rope they were using as a
guideline. He remembered an air pocket that they had
encountered earlier, and managed to reach it just as his air ran
out. Orr crawled up on a ledge to get out of the water, and
waited for help. He prayed for a while, and then fell asleep.
Scott Hunsucker, a certified cave diver, entered the cave
six hours later on Saturday evening expecting to find a corpse.
Instead, he found Orr alive but stranded. After exchanging
greetings, Hunsucker led Orr from the cave.
1. Associated Press, "Diver rescued from Panhandle cave
after six hours,' 18 June 2002.
2. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 20 June 2002.
Comments: According to the newspaper article, Orr was
believed to be the fourth person rescued alive out of nearly
500 divers reported missing in caves in Florida, Mexico, and
the Caribbean since 1960.


********** 8 November
Orange Grove Sink, Florida
fatality, lost consciousness, cause unknown
Chester Sciechowicz (58) and Jack Haller were diving in
Orange Grove Sink at Peacock Springs State Park when
Sciechowicz apparently suffered a heart attack and died. The
divers had entered the cave along with another team of two
divers. Sciechowicz and Haller turned their dive about 1,100
feet into the cave and started out, with Haller in the lead, while
the other team continued into the cave.
During their exit, Haller looked back and saw that
Sciechowicz did not appear to be moving. Haller turned back
to check on his partner and found him floating, motionless, in
a dome. His regulator was in his mouth and his equipment
appeared intact, but he was unresponsive and not breathing.

---------- Page 44 ----------
2002 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
The second dive team had also started out, and came upon
Haller and Sciechowicz at the dome. Haller and one of the
other divers headed out to get help, while the remaining diver
began moving Sciechowicz toward the entrance.
Haller surfaced and called for help. Other divers at the
scene responded, and helped pull Sciechowicz from the water.
2003 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports


********** 1 January
Ocean Blue Hole, Andros Island, Bahamas
two fatalities, cause unknown
Two divers were reported missing after they failed to
return from a dive in Ocean Blue Hole, a well-known dive
spot off Andros Island which exceeds 500 feet in depth. The
missing divers were employees of a nearby field research
station, and were reported to have been diving blue holes in
the area, using recently-purchased dive computers. When they
did not return, searchers found their boat anchored at the site.
Initial search dives to a depth of 210 feet did not yield any
sign of the missing divers. Recovery divers were called to the
scene, and made additional dives on January 2 and 3 to search
likely areas of the cavern at depths of 220, 330, and 470 feet,
but the missing divers were not found. Further efforts were
deemed inadvisable due to the extreme depth and the changing
weather conditions.
Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue and
Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 11 January 2003.
Comments: One of the missing divers was reported to be a
Diving Instructor and the other a Dive Master. It was also
reported that the divers were using basic open-water
equipment, with no redundant backups other than lights, and
that neither diver had been trained in technical or cave diving
procedures.


********** 23 May
Cow Spring, Florida
fatality, lost consciousness, cause unknown
Chris Henson (35) filled his tanks at a local dive facility on
the evening of May 23 and went to Cow Spring for a solo
dive. He was reported overdue at about noon the following
day. After his vehicle was located at the parking area,
recovery divers were called to the site and entered the water at
about 2:30 p.m. They followed the permanent guideline and
found his body near the line about 1,100 feet from the
entrance at a depth of 86 feet. He appeared to have been on his
way out of the cave. His lights and other equipment were
found to be fully functional, with 2,000 psi of air in back-
mounted double tanks and 2,000 psi in a "buddy bottle."
1. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 28 May 2003.
2. "News - Past & Present," NSS Cave Diving Section Web
Site, www.nsscds.org, undated..
He showed no signs of life, and could not be revived. He was
reported to have had a history of heart problems.
1. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 8 November 2002.
2.
Susan Lamb, "Pennsylvania man dies in Peacock
Springs, Suwannee Democrat, 13 November 2002.
Comments: Henson was a certified cave diver with more than
400 dives, including three at Cow Spring. Cow Spring is
owned by the NSS Cave Diving Section. Access is restricted
to members of that organization.


********** 9 August
Little River Spring, Florida
fatality, cause unknown
Katherine Cattell (42) had just completed her second dive
at Little River Spring and was walking to her car, still wearing
her diving equipment, when she complained of chest pain.
According to reports, Cattell told her diving companion that
she felt "pains radiating through her body." She collapsed, and
could not be revived. Authorities stated that they believed the
death to be dive-related, possibly due to an embolism.
Violet McDonald, "Female diver dies, Suwanee Democrat,
14 August 2003.


********** 23 August
Roubidoux Spring Cave, Missouri
fatality, out of air
Steven Wibracht (50), Ron Shirley, and John Davis
entered Roubidoux Spring Cave for a stage dive to the Big
Room, located about 1,400 feet from the entrance at a depth of
165 feet. All three divers were cave certified in accordance
with the access requirements for the site. Each diver wore
double tanks filled with tri-mix and carried an additional stage
tank of tri-mix, as well as a nitrox tank to be used during the
entry stage of the dive and then staged for use during
decompression. All three divers were equipped with scooters
for propulsion. The water temperature was about 50 degrees,
and they were wearing drysuits.
Their dive plan was to enter using the nitrox tank and
proceed to a stage point at the Drop Off, a room located about
350 feet into the cave, where the passage descends from a
depth of 50 feet to about 135 feet before entering the lower
tunnel passage. There they would leave the nitrox tanks for
later use during decompression. After switching to the tri-mix
travel tank, they would use their scooters to travel about 1,100
feet along the lower tunnel to the Big Room, then switch to the
back-mounted doubles for the trip out, with decompression
stops at the Drop Off and at the spring pool. They planned to
turn the dive at the Big Room, or whenever one of the divers
exhausted the air in his travel stage bottle.
Leaving oxygen bottles at 20 feet for use in the final stage
of decompression, they located the permanent guideline,

---------- Page 45 ----------
2003 Cave Diving Accident and Incident Reports
which begins in the cavern zone, about 75 feet from the
entrance, and entered the cave. Using their scooters, they
followed the line into and through the upper tunnel for about
350 feet at a depth of 45 feet until they reached the Drop Off.
Each diver left a tank at 70 feet for use during decompression
on the trip out, and they proceeded toward the Big Room.
The lower tunnel, also known as Whichaway Avenue, runs
for about 1,600 feet to the Big Room and beyond, and has an
average depth of about 150 feet. The passage has an average
height of about four and a half feet. The three divers made
their way toward the Big Room without incident. Wibracht,
however, used up his stage bottle sooner than expected, and
switched to his back tanks early. The other divers were
apparently unaware of this, and the trio continued to the Big
Room, where they turned the dive as planned, and started out.
As they traveled back through Whichaway Avenue,
Wibracht checked the pressure in his back tanks and found
that he had only 500 psi remaining. He showed this to Shirley,
who offered Wibracht his extra regulator, which was attached
to a long hose for use in such circumstances. Sharing Shirley's
air supply, the two divers continued toward the Drop Off.
Wibracht had some difficulty controlling his buoyancy,
hindering their progress. Davis, apparently unaware of the
problems, proceeded ahead of them.
Wibracht and Shirley made it to the end of the lower
tunnel, at 135 feet, and started up the Drop Off. Wibracht had
managed to get his buoyancy under control in the tunnel, but
as they ascended above 100 feet he began, once again, to have
problems. He floated above Shirley until he reached the end of
the long hose on the regulator, which was then pulled from his
mouth. Wibracht swam back down to Shirley and took
Shirley's backup regulator. He took a few breaths, then gave
an "OK" signal. Shirley tried to locate his long hose regulator.
He found it, but when he looked up, Wibracht was nowhere in
sight. The activity had stirred up the silt, reducing visibility.
Shirley moved up to the decompression stop at 70 feet
where he, Davis, and Wibracht had left bottles earlier. Davis
had already picked up his bottle and started out, but
Wibracht's bottle was still there, along with Shirley's. Seeing
no sign of Wibracht, Shirley retrieved his own decompression
bottle and continued his ascent toward the entrance. Another
team of divers was passing through the room, and Shirley
thought that Wibracht might have gone to them for assistance.
Upon reaching the surface, Shirley was unable to locate
Wibracht, and sought help. Divers entered the cave and soon
found Wibracht's body, floating on the ceiling above the area
where Shirley had last seen him. His stage tank and both of his
double tanks were empty. The exhaust valve on his drysuit
was found to be completely closed.
1. Jodi Thompson, "Diver drowns in Roubidoux Springs,
Waynesville Daily Guide, 26 August 2003.
2. Incident Report, Pulaski County Sheriff's Department, 23
August 2003.
3. "Roubidoux Spring Fatality," The DecoStop Internet
forum, www.thedecostop.com, 2 October 2003.
Comments: According to the incident report, Davis and
Shirley stated that Wibracht did not signal them to call the
dive when his travel tank was exhausted, as called for in the
dive plan. Wibracht's back-mounted tanks were apparently
already nearing empty when he switched to them. They were
full when he started the dive. The official report of the
incident noted that his regulator was set to its most sensitive
setting, and suggested that this might have allowed the
regulator to vent in a "free flow" condition. The dive was
Wibracht's first experience using a scooter, and it was
suggested that the unfamiliar noise of the scooter may have
masked the sound of a leak during the trip in.
There was some degree of miscommunication between the
three divers as to the nature and severity of the situation.
Davis reported that he looked back to check on the others
during the trip out, and that Wibracht repeatedly gave the
"OK" signal. Shirley was apparently unaware of this, and
reported that he had signaled for assistance, to no avail. Poor
visibility and separation of the group hampered their
communications. The buoyancy control problems were
attributed to the closed exhaust valve on Wibracht's dry suit.
The gas management and buoyancy problems, compounded
by miscommunication and siltation, led to a tragedy.


********** 26 November
Little River Spring, Florida
fatality, silt, lost guideline, out of air
Jerry Duwayne Beets (42) and Kane Overfield (46) entered
Little River Spring at about noon, planning an 80-minute dive.
Both divers were certified cave divers with over two years of
experience and had dived Little River 15 to 25 times. Each
diver had a scooter, and they intended to travel into the cave
until one-third of their air was consumed and then exit.
The divers made their way to the Well Casing, where
Beets stopped. Overfield continued for 200 to 300 feet before
realizing that Beets was not following. He returned to the Well
Casing and found the area silted out.
While searching for the line in zero-visibility conditions,
Overfield bumped into Beets and grabbed him. Beets seemed
okay, SO Overfield let go of him for a moment to clip his
scooter into the line. When he reached for Beets again, he was
gone. Unable to locate Beets, Overfield left the silted area,
swam until he reached clear water, and waited, banging on his
tanks as a signal. Eventually, he decided that Beets must have
gone out ahead of him and made his own way out.
Overfield completed his decompression and exited the
water. When he could not find Beets on the surface, he sought
help. Other divers at the spring entered the cave and found
Beets at the end of the Florida Room, about 1,200 feet from
the entrance, apparently dead. They attempted to give him air,
but he was unresponsive. Both of his air tanks were empty.
They clipped his body to the guideline and left the cave.
A recovery diver summoned by authorities entered the
cave and retrieved the body. The two scooters were also
retrieved from the cave. Overfield's scooter was found at the
Well Casing, clipped to the guideline. Beets' scooter was
found about 100 feet past the Dome Room, with its nose and
shroud covered with red clay.
1. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 26 November 2003.
2. Len Dramesi, "Diver dies in cave," Suwannee Democrat,
4 December 2003.
3. "Man dies while cave diving in Suwannee," Gainesville
Sun, 28 November 2003.

---------- Page 46 ----------
2002 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 25 February
State Trooper Cave, Kentucky
road collapsed into cave
Four cars were damaged but no one was injured when a
300-foot by 200-foot area including a section of Dishman
Lane collapsed into State Trooper Cave at 5:15 p.m. on a
Monday evening. The resulting sinkhole was estimated to be
at least 40 feet deep. Following the collapse, a pickup truck
was visible at the bottom of the sink. The area around the cave
is an active development, with new homes, businesses, and a
large church under construction. The cave is about 50 feet
below the surface.
1. Steve Gaines and Jim Waters, "Dishman Lane collapses,
Bowling Green Daily News, 26 February 2002.
2. Amy Wagner, "Road Caves in Under Cars,"
www.wkbo.com, 26 February 2002.
3. Karl Niles, "Just a matter of time!" TAG-Net #2759, 26
February 2002.
Comments: Niles reports that the city knew about the location
of the cave, but constructed the road anyway. A city engineer
was reported in the newspaper account to have said that the
cause of the collapse was unknown.


********** 26 February
Cove Mine, Pickens County, Georgia
drowned diving in abandoned mine
Travis Jenkins and Dale Fisher entered Cove Mine seeking
to explore flooded tunnels in the abandoned marble mine.
Both men were open-water divers, but neither of the two had
any formal training or certification in cave or cavern diving.
They were equipped with standard open-water gear plus one
light each. The men tied off a dive reel and entered an open
pool in a large chamber. Jenkins was carrying the reel, and
stopped briefly to clear it when it jammed. When he looked
up, Fisher was missing.
When he could not locate his partner, Jenkins left the mine
and called for help. Rescue divers made several attempts to
locate Fisher, but were hampered by poor visibility in the
sediment-filled water. Efforts were eventually suspended in
order to allow time for the water to clear. Fisher's body was
later recovered from a side tunnel off the main chamber.
1. Saeed Ahmed, "Diver is missing in Pickens cave, Atlanta
Journal-Constitution, 27 February 2002.
2. Incident report, International Underwater Cave Rescue
and Recovery, www.iucrr.org, 27 February 2002.
3.
"Second Cove Mine Diver says they weren't in over their
heads on fatal exploration, Pickens County Progress, 14
March 2002.
Comments: Jenkins told reporters that the men had permission
from the city of Jasper to explore and map the mine. He also
said that the men were properly trained and equipped for the
dive, and that they were not cave diving because they planned
to dive only in the open pools of the mine, rather than in the
overhead environment of the flooded tunnels. Experienced
cave divers may disagree with Jenkins' assessment.


********** 4 April
unspecified cave near Hannibal, Missouri
body found in cave
The body of Brenda Sue Link (46) was found in a cave
near Hannibal. She had been reported missing on April 1.
Police began searching caves in the area after finding her
scooter nearby. Police said that there were no signs of a
struggle, and that they did not suspect foul play.
"Woman's body found in cave," Jefferson City News Tribune,
8 April 2002.


********** 7 April
Sinks of Roundstone, Kentucky
would-be caver fall, alcohol related
After downing a few cold ones, a group of six people
equipped with flashlights and a cooler of beer headed for the
Sinks of Roundstone, expecting to have a splendid adventure.
As they approached the cave, one member of the already-
intoxicated party decided to jump rather than climb down a
six-foot drop from a ledge just outside the entrance. This
didn't work out very well, and he suffered a broken tibia,
broken fibula, and a variety of scrapes and bruises.
Other members of the party eventually notified authorities,
and rescuers soon arrived at the scene, where they found the
injured man lying on the ground, shivering. He had been lying
there for about three hours. The man refused all offers of
blankets or other methods to keep him warm, but allowed
rescuers to immobilize his broken leg, place him in a litter,
and carry him to a waiting ambulance. He was taken to a
hospital for treatment.
Stephen Vaughn, Incident report, 7 April 2002.
Comments: Friends don't let friends cave drunk.


********** 8 April
abandoned lead mine, Arkansas
rockfall entrapment
David Foster (11), William Foster (9), and Jeffrey Foster
(19) went looking for treasure in an abandoned Civil War-era
lead mine near Thida. Inspired by local legends, they had
begun exploring the mine the previous week, and had noticed
sparkling dust on their shirts after the trip. They returned with
digging tools hoping to strike it rich. Instead, they were
trapped for more than 24 hours when the dirt ceiling and walls
of the passage collapsed behind them about 250 feet inside the
mine. Volunteers spent hours digging through the collapse to
rescue the boys, who were unharmed by the experience.
1. Brian Skoloff, "Three boys survive night after cave-in at
old mine," Cleveland Plain Dealer, 10 April 2002.

---------- Page 47 ----------
2002 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports
2. Associated Press, "Volunteers rescue 2 boys, teen from old
mine, 9 April 2002.
Comments: Sheriff's Captain Bill Lindsey told reporters that
there was no basis for the local legends of gold or treasure in
the mine.


********** 23 June
Blue Light Mine, California
drowned in abandoned mine
Nicholas Anderson (23), his brother Glenn Anderson (18),
and their friend Matt Murphy (17) hiked up Pine Canyon on a
Sunday afternoon planning to explore abandoned 19th century
mines near the ruined mining town of Silverado. They entered
the abandoned Blue Light Mine wearing shorts and T-shirts,
equipped with flashlights.
The group encountered a water-filled passage, and Murphy
decided to wait while the Andersons continued. When they
had not returned after two hours, Murphy left the mine to
summon help. Authorities soon arrived and began a search of
the mine. On Monday morning, divers arrived to search the
flooded sections. After a 30-minute search, the bodies were
located in about 10 feet of water in a tunnel about 600 feet
from the mine entrance.
1. Mike Anton, Dave McKibben, and Tina Borgatta,
"Brothers Die While Diving in Old Mine,' Los Angeles
Times, 25 June 2002.
2. Associated Press, "Two brothers swim to their deaths in
abandoned mine shaft," San Diego Union-Tribune, 25
June 2002.
Comments: The Times article notes that about half a dozen
people die and dozens more are injured each year exploring
abandoned mines in California. Rescuers also reported that the
oxygen level in the mine was about 4%. The brothers were
described in the newspaper reports as "experienced swimmers
and cave explorers," but were not NSS members and did not
have proper caving equipment.


********** 30 June
Halona Blowhole, Hawaii
fell into blowhole and drowned
Daniel Dick (18) ignored warning signs, a locked gate, and
the verbal warnings of onlookers as he climbed down and
stood straddling the opening of Halona Blowhole, a popular
tourist attraction near Oahu's Sandy Beach. As Dick stood
atop the opening at about 3:15 p.m., water shot up through the
blowhole and blasted him into the air. As he fell, he was
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
sucked into the opening. Bystanders called authorities, who
began a search. Dick's body was recovered from the blowhole
by divers the next day.
1. Associated Press, "Body of teen recovered from Oahu
blowhole, San Diego Union-Tribune, 1 July 2002.
2. Associated Press, "Teen's body recovered," Hawaii
Tribune-Herald, 2 July 2002.
3. Leila Fujimori, "Divers retrieve Blowhole victim,
Honolulu Star-Bulletin, 1 July 2002.
Comments: Dick was reported to be the third person to drown
in the blowhole since 1969.


********** 17 July
unnamed sand cave, California
fatality, passage collapsed
An unidentified man died in a sand "cave" he was
apparently using for shelter when it collapsed around him. He
was found by two boys who came to explore the opening,
which they had spotted the day before, about 30 feet above the
beach. The boys ran and told their father, who called 911.
Police, lifeguards, and park rangers worked to dig the man out
from the sand, as the walls continued to crumble.
Kevin Clerici and Pauline Repard, "Apparent drifter dies in
cave-in at beach in Carlsbad," San Diego Union-Tribune, 19
July 2002.
Comments: It was reported that the opening was less than 10
feet wide and was dug into soft sand. As one reviewer noted,
this incident should be a reminder to all who dig in sediments
that as little as three to four feet of depth in a trench or tunnel
can be fatal if the walls collapse.


********** 18 August
unspecified cave near Athens, Alabama
body found in cave
Searchers looking for a man who had been reported
missing found what was thought to be his body in a cave near
Shanghai, west of Athens. The badly decomposed body could
not be readily identified, but the man appeared to have died
from a gunshot wound to the head. A gun was found near the
body. It was believed that the body had been in the cave for
about a week. The missing man had last been seen on the
roadside in that area on August 10.
Holly Hollman, "Body found in Limestone [County] cave may
be missing man, Decatur Daily News, 19 August 2002.

---------- Page 48 ----------
2003 Caving-related Accident and Incident Reports


********** 26 May
Maryland Mine, Idaho
fatality in abandoned mine, bad air
Travis Michaelis (25) and members of his family were
exploring the abandoned Maryland Mine near Salmon, Idaho,
when their dog ran ahead of the group and fell into a 125-foot
deep mine shaft. Michaelis, who was reported to be an
experienced climber, returned to the mine the next day to try
to retrieve the animal from the shaft.
As other family members stood by, Michaelis rigged a
rope and rappelled into the shaft. As he descended, he called
up, "The air is getting thin." Shortly after that, he lost contact
with the group above, and did not respond to their calls.
Family members went for help, and search and rescue
personnel were dispatched to the site.
A rescuer wearing an air pack was lowered to the bottom
of the shaft, where he found Michaelis' body. An autopsy later
determined that he had died from hypoxia. His body was
placed in a litter and hauled up the shaft, then carried out to
the surface.
1. Janet Taylor-Nelson and Mike Warner, Incident report, 26
May 2003.
2. Leslie May Shumate, "Tragedy for Rexburg Family,"
www.Imshumate.com, 29 May 2003.
Comments: Rescuers found no sign of the dog. The passage at
the bottom of the drop sloped away from the shaft.


********** 30 June
Deer Bone Cave, Alaska
caver fall while hiking back from cave
Fred Grady (55) was on a paleontological expedition to dig
in caves on Coronation Island. While walking back to camp
from Deer Bone Cave, he fell and a branch struck his left eye,
lacerating the lower lid. Later that evening he began to see
"flashing halos" in the peripheral vision of his left eye. By the
next morning, these symptoms were greatly reduced, though
he continued to experience "slightly clouded vision" in the
affected eye.
Grady elected to stay with the expedition, but when he
returned home he went to his doctor and was informed that the
vitreous humor in his eye had been affected by the trauma,
causing the cloudy vision. The symptoms gradually faded.
1. Fred Grady, Incident report, 30 June 2003.
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
2. Fred Grady, "A Trip to Coronation Island, Southeastern
Alaska, The West Virginia Caver, v21n6, p. 5, December
2003.
Comments: Grady reports that he lost the trail due to jet lag
and fatigue. It had been marked with orange and pink
flagging, but Grady is red-green color blind. He also notes that
he was wearing contact lenses due to the rainy conditions, and
that he would probably not have been injured if he had been
wearing his glasses.


********** 9 July
unnamed sea cave at Sunset Cliffs, California
body found in sea cave
The body of an unidentified man was found in a small sea
cave at Sunset Cliffs Park in San Diego. A man walking on the
beach spotted the body at about 1:00 p.m. and used his cell
phone to call police. Cause of death was unknown, but the
medical examiner reported that the man had been dead for
several days before being found. It was not known whether the
body had floated into the cave during high tide or whether the
man had walked into the cave and died there.
"Body of man found in sea cave, San Diego Union-Tribune,
10 July 2003, p. B2.


********** 20 December
unnamed sink, Blount County, Alabama
rockfall entrapment
While ridgewalking with two companions, Van Cain (32)
climbed down into a small karst feature to check for cave
passage. Finding none, he started to climb out. He reached up
to get a handhold for support, but when he pulled on the rock
it gave way.
Large rocks and rubble collapsed onto Cain, striking him
on the head and pinning him. Cain braced himself to prevent
further collapse while one of his companions moved rocks to
free him. He sustained cuts and bruises to his face, hands, and
lower legs, but was not seriously injured.
1. Van Cain, Incident report, 22 December 2003.
2. Van Cain, "Cave Digging and Near Miss,' TAG-Net
Digest #3404, 22 December 2003.
Comments: Cain reports that he did not test the hold before
pulling on it, and will be more careful in the future. He also
notes that he was wearing his helmet, which prevented more
serious injury.

---------- Page 49 ----------
The National Cave Rescue Commission
The National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) is a
volunteer group developed to train cave rescue personnel
throughout the United States. It is part of the NSS, located
within the Department of the Administrative Vice-President.
The NCRC does not perform cave rescues. It organizes,
develops, and provides training in cave rescue techniques,
maintains lists of individuals trained in cave rescue, and can
help locate rescue resources in times of need. Most NCRC-
trained cavers do participate in rescues, but not as part of the
NCRC. They work as members of their local rescue teams,
civil defense units, or cave rescue groups.
The NCRC also works to:
Maintain good working relationships with other rescue-
oriented individuals, organizations, government
agencies, and sources of specialized equipment and
services (e.g., the Air Force Rescue Coordination
Center and the Center for Mine Safety and Health
Administration).
Maintain current files of potentially useful equipment
(e.g., underground communications equipment and
cave-oriented medical kits) and services that can be
obtained through the above sources.
Acquire and maintain a limited supply of certain
equipment such as special rescue litters and vertical
rescue gear in key locations throughout the country.
Increase the number and proficiency of cave rescuers
across the United States by sponsoring training
sessions and seminars, and by encouraging other
caving, rescue, and EMS organizations to sponsor such
educational programs.
Encourage international cooperation by developing
contacts with cave rescuers and rescue agencies in
other countries, by preplanning with these groups
where US involvement is anticipated, and by inviting
participation of cave rescuers from other countries in
NCRC seminars.
Organization
The NCRC is led by a Board of Regional Coordinators.
The Board includes a National Coordinator, Training
Coordinator, Medical Coordinator, and Diving Coordinator
(each of whom coordinates resources and activities at a
national level), and Regional Coordinators for each of ten
National Cave Rescue Commission Course Listings and Contact Information:
www.ncrc.info
Report accidents and incidents via the Internet at www.caves.org/pub/aca
or mail reports and information to:
American Caving Accidents
National Speleological Society
2813 Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810-4431
regions in the United States and its territories. Board members
are nominated by cavers and cave rescue personnel, and are
appointed by the NSS Board of Governors. The NCRC
depends on many volunteers without official positions whose
special knowledge, talents, or contacts make the network more
effective.
Training
The NCRC sponsors a week-long Cave Rescue Operations
and Management Seminar each year that is held in various
locations around the United States. The seminar serves as a
"boot camp" of cave rescue and involves three levels of
training. Cave rescue is constantly evolving, and the most up-
to-date techniques are presented each year. In addition to the
annual national week-long seminar, the NCRC regions
sponsor regional week-long seminars, regional modular
seminars (taught over a series of weekends), courses in small-
group and self-rescue techniques, and weekend cave rescue
orientation courses.
NCRC seminars consist of extensive classroom and field
work designed to maximize the learning experience. The cave
rescue programs provide studies in underground
environments, vertical rescue, mechanical advantage systems,
extrication techniques, basic medical principles,
communications, and management of cave rescue operations.
Emphasis is placed on practical skills and techniques, with
realistic exercises in a variety of cave environments.
The seminars provide basic and advanced material for
students who typically include cavers, emergency services
personnel, and emergency managers. During the eight days of
a seminar, students receive about 100 hours of instruction, and
are on the move from early morning well into the evening.
The NCRC uses and teaches the Incident Command System
(ICS) used by fire departments, rescue squads, and other
emergency agencies and services.
Course Listings and Contact Information
Information on NCRC operation, activities, and training,
including contact information for NCRC Coordinators, is
published each year in the NSS Members Manual, and is also
available on the NCRC web site at www.ncrc.info. Upcoming
seminars are announced on the web site and in the NSS News.
