
---------- Page 1 ----------
GUA
GAME TTW ME
OCTOB
IN
WOL.GND.2

---------- Page 2 ----------
An Open Letter to the Caving Community
I
hope these are not my last words, but I don't want to take any chances.
Friends have disappeared from our community, through death or burn-
out, and I know most have left with deep emotions about cavers, caves and
caving. Some were taken unexpectedly, others knew but never verbalized
their feelings. Though it would frustrate me beyond measure to die in some
dismal and unanticipated way such as an auto accident, it certainly is
possible. So, still being as sound of mind and body as a caver ever is, I take
typewriter keys in hand to try to express some feelings many of us have had,
before I drift away too Had I the talent, I would write a song or poem
whose images and rhythms could speak with an intensity this simple prose
lacks.
It's hard for me to imagine my world Before Caving. I know I was once
completely unaware of wild caves. But that pre-existence seems so dull and
flat
Caving has insinuated itself so intimately into my life that, like the
alga joining with the fungus to create a lichen, caving has created of my life
something qualitatively different.
A person needs to throw himself into something with intensity. Without
this, life is mere existence. Some people find God. Some find lasting love.
Some find all the intensity they need in their work. A lucky few are able to
transmute that energy into music, or art, or poetry. I've dabbled in them all.
Caving has been the only field that held me long enough to drain me of
excess energy - and demand more, and make me steal from other parts of
my life to find it.
Sometimes I reflect on this "magnificent obsession," filled with guilt
because I'm not doing something more constructive with my time and
energy. I've advanced very little in my career, squandered my hard-earned
education, devoted precious little time to family. I'm no pillar of my
residential community, which hardly knows I exist.
Despite such doubts, the obsession is magnificent. I've experienced in its
thrall more than my human share of beauty, of delight, of joy, of challenge,
of stimulation, of all the things that distinguish real life from mere existence.
Caving has given me so much that, in the words of a song, it may be "a debt
that can't be paid.'
Like many cavers, I've worked for my grotto and other caving associa-
tions, for conservation and safety and other things that matter. I've served
on committees, trained novices, picked up trash, surveyed and resurveyed,
volunteered for lots of things I didn't have time for. But I haven't worked as
PREMIER BRASS CARBIDE LAMPS
Racks
Justrite 4" Reflector
18.75
PMI Rack (Uses SMC Brakebars)
With Premier 2 1/2' Reflector
18.50
B & B Brakebars
Tip Cleaner 2.00 Thick Gasket (3-16")
.25
(for PMI Racks only)
Repair Kit (Tip, Tip Cleaner, Felt,
SMC Brakebars
Gasket, Reamer)
3.25
Gossett Chest Boxes
Complete Supply of Repair Parts Available
Repair Parts Available
HELMETS & PARTS
JUSTRITE ELECTRIC HEADLAMP
Fibre-metal helmet with L-1 bracket
With Battery Pack (Less Batteries)
(chin strap not included)
1904-0
15.95
Color: Yellow
Without Battery Pack 1904-2
11.50
Phos. Blue
Complete Supply of Repair Parts Available
Chin Strap
Complete Line of Miniature Light Bulbs Available
Complete Supply of Repair Parts Available
EVERREADY FLASHLIGHTS
Skipper Model: Waterproof, Shockproof,
Floating "C" or "D" Cell Size
VERTICAL EQUIPMENT
Lost Creek Packs - Full Line Available
Carabiners B & B Brand
Oval
4.25
MISCELLANEOUS STUFF
Locking D
5.75
Knee Pads
Continuous Oval Rings For
Judsen
Linking Carabiners, ea
1.00
Rockmaster
Sling Materials
Canvas Grip
tubular sling (white)
19/ft


********** 8 Oz
2" seat belt webbing
20/ft


********** 16 Oz
9-16" tubular sling
16/ft


********** 32 Oz
5-16 Tenstron
.08 ft.
Gloves
Buckles For 2 Webbing
2.25 ea.
Leather Palm, Men's Large, Men's
Harnesses
Medium & Women's Sizes
Adjustable Swiss Seat
7.00 ea.
Cyalume Light Sticks
Whillans Sit Harness, Sizes S, M or L 47.50 ea.


********** 10 Hour
Ascenders
Gibbs Quick Release
23.95
Full Line of Petzl Equipment
Gibbs Spring Loaded
24.95
Many Books Available
Jumars
59.95 pair
Complete Supply of Repair Parts Available
Wheat Lamp & Charger
Wheat Lamp Only (Model 5200)
ROPES
Charger for Model 5100
PMI 7-16
45/ft
Suunto Compass
Bluewater II 7-16
.46
Suunto Clinometer
Goldline II 7-16
56/ft
Many Other Nifty Items
hard or as long as some cavers, and I'm not sure whether doing even that
would pay my debt. Maybe, as my church teachers used to tell me about
God's love, it's worth so much that it can't possibly be earned; the best you
can do is try very hard.
I don't believe in God anymore, so I can't thank Him or Her in my prayers
for letting me be a part of the spelean world. I can't tell my feelings to this
friend or that, or they think me a sentimental or a drunken fool. But I refuse
to leave this world with my thanks shoved deep into a muddy pocket of my
coveralls, so I fling my gratitude to you all together, and to the caves which,
stony and cold as they are, just might have some spirit to accept my homage.
I leave this world of mud and crystal, of power and delicacy, profoundly
grateful for many things:
For people who write and perform the songs that evoke treasured
memories, honor our comrades and our caving grounds, tell our history,
make us laugh at ourselves, express our wonder and our joy. Know that
whatever pleasure it brings to you to create this music, it brings us listeners as
much or more to hear it and to sing it again and again.
For people who, month after month, in the face of broken presses,
wretched budgets, sparse material and missed caving weekends, publish the
newsletters that help keep us together. There is no such thing as a community
without communication. And I doff my hardhat to you who lavish the time
and effort to write the material. Your research, your writing skill, your in-
ventive and sometimes wicked humor have astounded, informed and always
delighted me. And to the photographers, who are awful to cave with but
worth every cold, boring eon when their pictures appear. Like most of my
friends, I have shelves and file drawers and cardboard boxes filled with
grotto, regional, sectional and national newsletters, magazines from many
countries, books old and new, Speleo Digests, symposia proceedings, guide-
books, state survey bulletins, etc., etc., etc. I have just enough experience to
truly appreciate the effort and time required to produce even a fairly simple
publication. If I can't be underground, the next best thing is to read about it
or sing about it or look at pictures of it. You creators and purveyors will
never know how much pleasure (and longing!) you've brought me over the
years.
For people I've barely met or don't know at all: people who brave
boring meetings and frustrating speleopolitics to work with amazing dedi-
continues on page 254
15.00
2.00ea.
2.15
29.95
10.95
11.95
2.20
3.25
5.95 pr.
15.95 pr.
2.25
3.25
5.75
2.95
Prices subject
to change
without notice.
1.50 each
154.00
64.50
CAVERS SERVING CAVERS
64.50
P.O. Box 441
Write for complete price list.
49.50
Lewisburg,
Add 10% for shipping,
49.50
West Virginia 24901
minimum $1.00.
(304) 772-5049
Excess is refunded.

---------- Page 3 ----------
OCTOBER 1983
VOLUME 41, NUMBER 10
EDITORS: Jay Arnold, Karen Stuck Arnold
1058 Irving Avenue, Glendale, California 91201, Tele: 213-247-7302
ASSOC. EDITOR: Mike Dyas
ADVERTISING MGR: Gerry Forney, 911 Cook St., Denver, CO 80206
CORRESPONDENTS
AMCS
Bill Steele
MVOR
Pam Burns
SWR
Kathy Grossman
ARA
Ron McMenimen
NRO
Toms E. Smith
Texas
Randy Waters
CAVES
Sue McGee
NCR
Gary K. Soule
VAR
Bob Custard
Central
Lynn Miller
NWCA
Rod Crawford
Western
Bob Ehr
MAR
John Ganter
SERA
Jeff Sims
Rocky Mtn.
Rich Wolfert
INSIDE
Recent Explorations in Castleguard Cave
American Caving Accidents 1982
Convention Report
Reading
COVER: With this fine drawing, Annapolis Grotto's Britt Griswold won
top honors for the second straight year in the Graphic Arts Salon. See a
complete list of winners elsewhere in this issue.
THE NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
PRESIDENT
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT
Paul Stevens
Ernst Kastning
5964 Seabright Rd.
P.O. Box 575
Springfield, Va. 22152
Storrs, Conn. 06268
ADMINISTRATIVE VICE PRESIDENT
SECRETARY-TREASURER
Joe Domnanovich
Tom Rea
4949 Nottingham Ln.
2455 Northern Dr.
Birmingham, Ala. 35223
Plainfield, Ind. 46168
DIRECTORS: Bob Addis, 19 Willowbrook Acres, Parkersburg, W. Va. 26101; Evelyn Bradshaw,
1732 Byron St., Alexandria, Va. 22303; Rane L. Curl, Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Univ. of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. 48109; Rick Day, 4414 E. Burns, Tucson, Ariz. 85711; Mike Dyas,
6009 Backlick Rd., Springfield, Va. 22150; Bob Ehr, 1226 Alamo Way, Pittsburg, Calif. 94565;
Chuck Hempel, Box 3038, Morgantown, W. Va. 26505; Bob Liebman, P.O. Box 1, Sinks Grove,
W. Va. 24975; Janet McCormick, 8028 Fenway Rd., Bethesda, Md. 20817; Doug Medville, 11762
Indian Ridge Rd., Reston, Va. 22091; William Mixon, 7413 Grover Ave., Austin, Texas 78757;
Robert R. Stitt, 1417 Avenue West, Seattle, Wash. 98119.
National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave Avenue, Huntsville, Ala. 35810. Subscription rate is $15
per year. When changing an address, give old address as well as new. Second-class postage paid at
Huntsville, Ala., and additional mailing offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, Ala. 35810.
Deadlines: All ads, articles and announcements must be submitted to the editors by the first day of
the month preceding the month of publication (e.g., June 1 for July issue).
Advertising: Display ads must conform to certain sizes based upon multiples of the minimum-sized
ad, 1 column (2-3/8 in.) wide by 2 1/2 in. high. A 1x21/2 black & white ad costs $13.75 for camera-
ready copy. There will be a slight additional charge if typesetting or layout is required. A 2 (4 3/4 in.)
by 2 1/2 ad costs $27.50, as does a 1x5 ad. A 3 (7-5/8 in.) by 2 1/2 is $41.25, etc. Half-price rates for
NSS internal organizations and activities. Others receive discounts for prepayment. Complete sizes
and rates - including color surcharge - furnished upon receipt. See Classified Ad section for
Classified Rates.
Copyright 1983 by the National Speleological Society
IF YOU LIKE CAVES, YOU SHOULD BE AN NSS MEMBER
The National Speleological Society is the only U.S. membership organization devoted
exclusively to the exploration, preservation and scientific study of caves and their
environment. Your dues help support the Society's many activities and help insure that
the caves we enjoy will be protected for the enjoyment of and study by future
generations. JOIN US!


********** 1 year


********** 2 years


********** 3 years
Regular (Age 17 or over)
$20
$38
$54
Associate (Non-voting. Under 17 or full-time
student over 17)
Sustaining (Age 17 or over. $38.50/year
credited toward Life Membership [$350].
Nine payments required.)
Institutional (Educational and scientific
institutions, commercial caves, etc.)
Name:
Address:
Zip
Date of Birth:
Telephone No.
Primary grotto affiliation (if none, put N/A)
CONSERVATION NOTES
By Sharon Kautto
Wilderness Subcommittee Chairman
Wilderness Several state wilderness bills have been introduced in
Congress. In order to avoid a Roadless Area Review and Evaluation
(RARE) III federal study, efforts are being made to resolve the wilderness
question on a state by state basis. The Forest Service has been forced to make
a RARE III study because of the October 1982 ruling by the Ninth Circuit
Court of Appeal in California that found the environmental impact
statement on which California's wilderness recommendations were based to
be inadequate. Congress has acted on RARE II proposals for wilderness
areas in several states. Many other proposals for wilderness areas are being
considered by Congress. Most of these bills contain "sufficiency" and
"release" provisions. The "sufficiency" language declares that the RARE
II environmental impact statement is sufficient and immune from court
challenges. The "release" provisions can vary from allowing the Forest
Service to review the roadless areas in 10 years for wilderness consideration
to forbidding the agency from ever again considering wilderness designation
for the land, and releasing the area for all types of development. The release
language determines how long any roadless area not given wilderness
protection can be managed for other purposes before being evaluated again.
The "soft release" mandates that the unprotected roadless lands need not be
managed for wilderness uses during the first 10 to 15 years of forest
planning. The "hard release" language forbids unprotected roadless areas
from ever being considered for wilderness again. The status of many of the
wilderness bills follows. Cavers from the various states can be contacted
regarding any caves or limestone in the proposed wilderness areas. Alabama
The House passed HR2477 which made additions to the Sipsey
Wilderness in the Bankhead National Forest. The bill was cosponsored by
six Alabama representatives and was introduced by Rep. Ronnie Flippo. The
bill's fate in the Senate was uncertain. Senators Jeremiah Denton and
Howell Heflin had not decided whether to support the Sipsey additions. The
National Forest Products Association opposed the legislation because of
continued on p. 266
JOHN GUILDAY CAVE PRESERVE
VIRGIN PASSAGE IN HAMILTON CAVE. On July 30 Dave West led a dig through
a partially clay-choked lead into virgin passage. The group - West, Bob Hoke, Cindy
Keller and Harold Driscoll - surveyed 260 feet of mostly tight crawls. Fred Grady
collected peccary teeth and foot bones in one of the dug sections.
EXTINCT MUSK OX FROM NEW TROUT CAVE. Recently Dr. John Hall, a bat
expert from Albright College in Reading, Pa., forwarded to Fred Grady a small
collection of bones and teeth picked up in New Trout several years ago. Dr. Jerry
McDonald of the Smithsonian Institution has identified among the specimens a large
tooth from an extinct relative of the musk ox. It was only the second find of an extinct
musk ox from West Virginia.
SALTPETER MINING ARTIFACT IN TROUT CAVE. During a recent dig in Trout
Cave, Chuck Wilkinson found the remains of a bundle of faggots, consisting of two
unburned faggots made from split wood and a binding of two pieces of bark tied at the
ends in square knots. Presumably the bundle was brought into the cave and individual
faggots were used as needed. The artifact was put into the custody of Ed Ricketts for
study and eventual deposit in the NSS Museum.
Fred Grady
Only $10,500 to go and this critter and
the Trout Rock Caves - are ours lock,
stock and barrel. Send your donation today to:
Ed Ricketts
6404 Caryhurst Dr.
Oxon Hill, MD 20744

---------- Page 4 ----------
eight cavers approximately seven kilometers
INTERNATIONAL
from the entrance. From this camp two days of
exploration and surveying netted more than a
RECENT DISCOVERIES RENEW INTEREST
kilometer of new passage beyond two known
IN CANADA'S CASTLEGUARD CAVE
leads. One lead required a bolt traverse around
a 139-meter deep pit (La Grande Gueule) to a
By Dave Crann
passage seen continuing on the other side of the
On April 1, 26 cavers from Alberta, Ontario
drop. The second required direct aid up beside a
and British Columbia met at a roadside parking
10-meter wall of loose boulders (Thompson's
lot in Banff National Park, Alberta, Canada.
Terror) that had remained unvisited for 13
Donning cross-country skis and fully laden
years. More leads now remain than were
packs they skied 20 kilometers through forest,
"cleaned up," and it is felt the potential for
along a glacier and across alpine meadows to
significant future discoveries is high.
the entrance of Castleguard Cave.
Testing of the cave radio proceeded about 1.5
This was to be the first official visit to the
kilometers into the cave. Although surface to
cave since April 1980, and only the 10th visit in
cave voice communication was lost a short way
the modern history of Castleguard (1967
in from the entrance, tonal communication
onwards). Access to the cave had been granted
remained fairly good throughout the test, as did
by national park officials to the Alberta Speleo-
cave to surface communication.
logical Society. Besides exploration, surveying
An impressive clean-up of both camps and
and photography the expedition members
the emergency depot was performed. Un-
undertook the field testing of a cave radio and
identifiable or ruined food and supplies were
general refurbishing of the cave's emergency
removed from the cave and inventories of
depot and two camps, as well as scientific
remaining stocks were made.
collection and observation.
The scientific collections (mainly biological)
along with temperature and geomorphological
An underground camp was established by
observations pose questions that require future
trips to provide answers. Most interesting was
the discovery of mites about 10 kilometers from
the entrance where the cave lies under the
Columbia Icefield.
Castleguard Cave is now more than 16 kilo-
meters long and has a depth of 310 meters.
While in the cave the eight-man exploration
party remained a self-contained unit. There was
no immediate reliance on the other expedition
members - a direct contrast to previous trips
during which parties depended heavily upon
"sherpas." The expedition would not have been
possible however without support from
members of the ASS who cached fuel, rope and
carbide at the entrance two weeks prior to the
expedition.
The first 1/2 to 3/4 kilometers of passage in
Castleguard is known to flood during warm
NEWSLINE
Roppel Cave was connected to the Mammoth
Cave System on Sept. 10 by members of the
Cave Research Foundation and the Central
Kentucky Karst Coalition, CKKC member Jim
Borden reports. The long-anticipated connec-
tion, which was made near the new Ferguson
entrance to the Mammoth system, makes a cave
Kevin Ecock crosses the 139-meter-deep La
totaling more than 290 miles, Borden says. He
Grande Gueule in Castleguard Cave.
anticipates Mammoth will reach 300 miles by
(Stein-Erik Lauritzen)
the end of 1983.
AN OPEN LETTER
continued from p. 252
cation for caves and the caving community. (If your motives aren't always
totally altruistic
well, that's not important, and it only shows you're
human.)
- For the inspiration of some truly high-caliber cavers I've met. You are
really great, talented, impressive - and lots more adjectives I'd never have
told you in person. You combine abilities and invest great energy in several
directions: you write damned good articles and trip reports, you work for
cave legislation, you study geomorphology and karst hydrology and speleo-
biology, you draw or paint, you write music or sing or play an instrument
(or all three), and you survey and map, you program computers, you make
beautiful photographs, you climb with grace and speed, you crawl tire-
lessly, you put yourself through the rigors of underground rescue practices,
you dance till dawn and party with vigor, you joke and pun inventively and
sometimes well, you work late nights as secretary of this or chairman of
that, you edit books, and write papers, you design and build vertical gear or
CASTLEGUARD CAVE
Beyond the Crutch
Ice
Plugs
Time
1967-1980 Explorations
Traveller
1983 Extensions
300m
Thompsons Terror
Bon
Appetit
The Crutch
Grande
Gueule
km
to entrance
Icefield
Main
Map
Entrance
periods and as such the cave should be entered
during winter only. It is hoped that on the basis
of the success of this year's trip permission will
be granted by park officials for a return trip to
the cave late next winter.
Expedition Personnel:
Exploration/Science - Dave Crann, Kevin
Ecock, Stein-Erik Lauritzen, John Pollock,
Chris Pugsley, Eric von Vorkampff, Steve
Worthington and Chas Yonge.
Clean-Up - Dave Chase, Ian Mackenzie,
Bill McDonald and Jamie Thomson.
Cave Radio/Surface - Tom Barton, Pam
Burns, Bill Davis, Dave Depledge, Ian
Drummond, Don Kulak, Laird Kulak, Tich
Morris, Duncan Morris, Don Mullins, Eric
Neilsen, Ian Phillips, Peter Thompson and
Cliff Wright.
By Jay Arnold
SPAIN TO HOLD 9TH CONGRESS
The Ninth International Congress of
Speleology will be held July 15-21, 1985 in
Jaca, a town in the Spanish Pyrenees. Rafael
Larma will be the General Secretary of the
Congress. Circulars and additional informa-
tion may be obtained by writing: IX Congreso
Internacional de Espeleologia, Apartado de
Correos 5.077, Zaragoza SPAIN.
light systems or luxurious hot tubs, you teach others to cave safely and with
respect
That any one person could bloom in so many directions is
amazing. That there are so many of you in the rather small world of caving
is very lucky. That several of you have been my friends and my caving
companions is one of Oztotl's richest blessings.
As I sit here, an image forms of a soda straw I once saw, the hemisphere
of water poised on its tip magnifying tiny, sharp crystals. As I watched, the
droplet stretched, became more ovoid. It broke free, falling toward the
shadowy blue-green pool below. Then, the most hauntingly beautiful sound
in the world, a sound which can exist only in the echoing stillness of a
cavern
The memory of this moment fills me so, I almost cry. (But Real Cavers
don't cry.)
It's enough, and more than enough. I have known it, and I have shared it
wordlessly with some of the finest people in the world - the others who
know that it's enough.
(Name withheld by request)

---------- Page 5 ----------
American Caving Accidents
Steve Knutson-Editor
Lynne-Copy editor
Mike Sims-Proofreader
INTRODUCTION
This is the first of annual issues of the compilation of cave accident reports from
the western hemisphere called American Caving Accidents. The previous issues
under my editorship, 1976-1979, and 1980-1981 were in essence catch-up volumes
made necessary by the demise of the publication for several years after 1975 and by
the difficulty in getting the right combination of funding and publishing outlet. It
was planned initially that annual issues should appear by about the middle of the
year following the year covered. This is the first issue that will approximate that
plan. It is hoped that timely appearances of accident reports will stimulate safer
caving in at least some of the readership. Your continued support in sending
reports, information and thoughtful criticism will be greatly appreciated. Whenever
possible, include the age of those involved-this piece of data is most often left out.
Send info on any accident or incident to:
Steve Knutson
505 Roosevelt Street
Oregon City, OR 97045
(503) 655-6609
It should be noted that I have changed the crude labeling of reports as
"accident" or "incident" to a scheme less crude and hopefully statistically more
meaningful. This sort of classification was suggested by another caver, to whose
name I have lost reference. Sorry:
A - With injury and evacuation (or external aid to the victim)
B - With evacuation (or other aid)
-With injury
0-Without injury or evacuation
E-SCUBA accident or incident
Thus A,B,C and major D were "accidents" and D plus minor C were
"incidents."
In reading the analyses, please keep in mind that I am not trying to affix
"blame" necessarily. Rather I am trying to suggest ways that the situation could
have had a safer conclusion. Caving is, above all, a recreation and I believe that this
recreation is obtained by a wilderness experience underground. For some it is
sufficient to merely be in a cave to obtain that wilderness feeling. Others must risk
life and limb to get the same feeling, the same recreation. We must not deny to
others that which we ourselves seek through "standardization" of cave safety. To
seek, to strive, even to personal destruction is part of the human spirit, and must
not be lost. Still, no matter what level of caving one seeks, read these reports and
you will come away with a greater safety awareness. If you disagree with the
analyses, ignore them and provide your own.
I wish to apologize to some cavers for using the term "flashlight cavers" in a
derogatory sense. I was referring to cavers who grab a flashlight as their only
source of light and carry on in a cave until the light fails at which point they must be
rescued. It has been rightly pointed out that some cavers, in caves requiring only
walking, prefer powerful hand lanterns. Indeed, it is in fact easier to walk on
irregular terrain with your light in your hand rather than on your helmet because of
greater shadow definition.
There has also been comment about the use of cable ladders versus single rope
techniques (SRT). I have my own preferences but basically the message must be
that whatever method one prefers, you must master it and in using it, take no
shortcuts.
INCIDENT CLASSIFICATION:
A with injury and evacuation (or external aid to the victim)
B with evacuation (or other aid
C with injury (no evacuation)
D without injury or evacuation
E Scuba - accident or incident
CAVE
STATE
TYPE
DATE
Previously Unreported 1981
Santa Cruz Sea Cave
California
B
4-22
Harry Hole Hole
Canada
A
7-13
Roppel Cave
Kentucky
D
December
Sloan's Valley Cave
Kentucky
B
1-2
Hennigh Cave
Pennsylvania
B
1-26
Patton Cave
W. Virginia
C
1-30
Sumidero Santa Elena
Puebla, Mexico
B
1-30
Post Office Cave System
California
A
3-7
Fisher Ridge Cave System
Kentucky
B
3-20
Haynes Cave
W. Virginia
C
3-26
Crooked Swamp Cave
N. Jersey
B
3-27
Nita Nanta
Oaxaca, Mexico
A
4-16
Buddy Penley's Cave
Virginia
A
4-17
Huccacove Cave
Colorado
B
4-26
Paul Penley Cave
Virginia
D
Spring
Sunnyside Cave
Pennsylvania
B
Spring
Ogle Cave
N. Mexico
D
5-16
The Cave
Belize
D
5-28
Leviathan Cave
Nevada
A
5-30
Parker's Pit
Indiana
A
6-12
Roppel Cave
Kentucky
A
6-12
Laurel Creek Cave
W. Virginia
B
6-13
Jansill Cave
N. Mexico
C
8-7
Roto Rooter Cave
California
D
8-14
Organ Cave
W. Virginia
D
8-14
Un-named, Water-filled Cave
Florida
A
8-24
Sullivan's Cave
Indiana
B
8-28
Binkley's Cave
Indiana
A
September
Your Cave
Alabama
C
9-11
Cueva de la Colindocia
Puerto Rico
B
10-3
Culverson Creek Cave
W. Virginia
C
10-3
Organ Cave
W. Virginia
B
10-4
Canadian Hole
W. Virginia
A
10-10
Grutas de Tolontongo
Hidalgo, Mexico
D
October
Park's Ranch Cave
N. Mexico
C
10-31
Snail Shell Cave
Tennessee
B
11-7
Green Valley Cave
Alabama
A
11-11
Friar's Hole System
W. Virginia
B
11-13
Vast Caverns
Alabama
A
11-13
Lisanby Cave
Kentucky
A
November
Huccacove Cave
Colorado
D
11-21
Un-named Pit
Oregon
D
11-27
Harman's Waterfall Cave
W. Virginia
B
11-28

---------- Page 6 ----------
Further Minor Incidents
Bear Plunge Pit
Tennessee
B
Aug.-81
Nunnally Mountain Cave
Indiana
C
April
Roppel Cave
Kentucky
D
6-12
Roppel Cave
Kentucky
D
6-12
Carcass Pit
Indiana
D
September
Indian Cave
Kentucky
D
11-24
Fisher Ridge
Kentucky
D
November
1981 REPORTS
B: Santa Cruz Sea Cave, California


********** April 22, 1981
At around 3 p.m. on Wednesday, April 22, 1981, Ray Wilkerson(17), Mike
Hopwood(17) and Ivin Torres(16) entered a 75 foot cave in a cliff adjacent to the
ocean near Santa Cruz, California. One of them was supposed to remain above with
a rope, but joined the other two. They explored around for awhile, then tried to get
out. The tide had meanwhile started coming in and where they had waded in, it was
now deep water and breakers. They could swim as far as the entrance but could get
no purchase on the slippery rocks there. They retreated and began yelling for help.
At first there was no one to hear them, but at around 6.30 p.m. a UCSC student,
Jim Tessier, chanced by, saw the trapped cavers' shoes on the rocks below West
Cliff Drive, knew the dangerous cave was there and took a look. Hearing their cries,
he ran to a fire alarm box and summoned help.
Firemen arrived quickly, lowered a chain ladder and coaxed the victims up. The
tide, still coming in, had almost covered the entrance.
REFERENCE: Mark Bergstrom "Three Rescued in SC" Santa Cruz Sentinel
Thursday, April 23, 1981, p
ANALYSIS: Entering a cave in the face of a sure flood, in this case the tide, is
foolish. THe lure of adventure is strong especially for the young.
A: Harry Hole Hole, British Columbia, Canada


********** July 13, 1981
In the afternoon of Monday, July 13, 1981 Dean Peak(15) and two companions of
similar age were caving in Harry Hole Hole, a cave near Hankin Point not far from
Coal Harbour on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Canada. Peak was free
climbing at a waterfall when a handhold broke causing him to fall 25 feet to the
bottom.
One companion exited the 150 feet of passage, mostly crawlway, to get help while
the other descended and waited with the victim, who had suffered at least a six inch
gash on the side of his head, and was unable to do the climb necessary to get out of
the cave.
At Coal Harbour a single rescuer was obtained, Murray Reusch but when he was
brought back to the scene, the rope he had proved too short-additional help and
equipment would obviously be needed. Reusch descended and waited with the
victim.
Calls went to the local ambulance service, the RCMP, and the mine rescue team
from Island Copper. Jim Pelletier, an experienced caver was captain of the latter
which arrived at the cave entrance at 8 p.m. Monday evening. Those at the bottom
of the shaft had for some time been soaking wet from the spray of the waterfall and
the victim was becoming hypothermic.
Apparently a rope was rigged, the victim was fitted with Gibbs ascenders and
with a safety line (belay?) allowed to ascend the waterfall under his own power. He
also had to do the 150 feet of crawling to the entrance since there was insufficient
room to carry him. At the entrance he was transported in a basket litter down the
steep slope to the shore of Rupert Arm.
REFERENCE: Anon. "Mine Rescue Team Lifts Boy from Hankin Pt. Cave" North
Island Gazette (Port Hardy, B.C.) 16:48 Wednesday, July 15, 1981 8.
ANALYSIS: The cavers were poorly equipped and lacked experience. The lack of a
helmet-mounted light may have contributed to the fall. Without a helmet the victim
was lucky not to have suffered worse head injuries. The use of running shoes also
could have made climbing more difficult.
D: Roppel Cave, Kentucky
December, 1981
On a Sunday night in December, 1981 Win Wright, Carol Trexler, Ben Keller,
Philip Balister, and Bill Koerschner arrived at the Roppel Cave fieldhouse near
Mammoth Cave National Park in central Kentucky. There they encountered Tom
Miller, who was spending a week at the fieldhouse. The weather was cold with
freezing rain.
The following morning Miller entered first, on a solo recon and the group entered
an hour later, as heavy rain began. Both went in the new Weller Entrance.
The group became lost looking for their survey objective and spent hours in a
maze area. Once on the route the effect of the rains was made obvious at the Lower
Black River where "Foaming torrents of muddy ice water gushed in from every
available side passage." At the climb up into the BWOB Passage, now a waterfall,
they encountered Miller. They climbed an alternate route and Miller headed out.
At Fairyland they found their path blocked by a sump. They began their retreat.
About 1/2 hour from the Weller Entrance they ran into a wet and possibly worried
Tom Miller who reported the Weller Entrance to be sumped. This was not good.
The group had been on the go for 12 hours and was getting tired. They would now
have to head for the Main Entrance, four hours away, and find the bypass to the 35
foot drop which had been freeclimbed before by others.
When they reached Coalition Chasm, they found two 70 foot waterfalls plunging
down. Wright began making up a prussik rig while others looked for the bypass. In
an hour of exploring various levels they arrived at the top of the rope. Miller headed
for the entrance to try that climb while the rest tried to contact those below over the
roar of the falls. Miller climbed the entrance drop and lowered a cable ladder.
Vertical gear was obtained at the fieldhouse and everyone was soon out.
REFERENCE: Bill Koerschner "The Great Roppel Debacle" Tech Troglodyte
Winter, 1982 pp 73-75.
ANALYSIS: The group felt that without Miller's report on the Weller Entrance,
they might have been too tired to make it out. Miller reportedly admitted that
without the groups' knowledge of the Coalition Chasm bypass, they might not have
gotten out.
1982 REPORTS
B: Sloan's Valley Cave, Kentucky


********** January 2, 1982
On January 2, 1982, a group of three returned from a trip into Sloan's Valley
Cave in Pulaski County, Kentucky, to find rain clouds moving in. They went back to
the Fieldhouse. At p.m. it started to rain.
The sign-out showed three inexperienced cavers had entered Left Cave at 6:30
p.m. and were thus not expected out until 2 a.m. Left Cave was known to flood, but
only under very heavy rain conditions. The rain volume gradually increased. At 9
p.m. the usually dry streambed north of the Fieldhouse had become a raging river.
A group headed for Left Cave at that point to get the cavers out if possible. The
cave was found not yet to be in flood and the group in question was quickly found.
The rain continued through the night and stopped the next morning. Evidence
indicated a 15 foot rise and the Duckunder, dry before, was sumped shut.
REFERENCE: Fred Anderson "The Sloan's Valley Flood" The Cave Crickett
Gazette 7:2 February, 1982 pp 16-17.
ANALYSIS: This shows the importance of signing out or leaving a note, but even
inexperienced cavers should have the sense to keep out of caves in bad weather.
B: Hennigh Cave, Pennsylvania


********** January 26, 1982
At p.m. on Tuesday, January 26, Gary Kuhn, a juvenile caver, part of a school
caving trip, became trapped in the entrance of Hennigh Cave near Park Forest
Junior High School near University Park, Pennsylvania. The campus patrol called
Will White at the University and at 3:30 p.m. he got a few cavers to investigate.
Meanwhile a school bus driver had involved himself and the Spring Mills Fire Dept.
had been called.
Hennigh Cave has two entrances, one a steep-sided sink 8 feet deep with a 20
foot free drop at the bottom, and the other a small, steeply sloping crawl to the
bottom of the 20 foot drop.
When the cave rescuers arrived, they found Kuhn in the sink with the school bus
driver positioned between him and the 20 foot drop. The two were tied together
with a one inch manila rope also attached to a tree. One caver from the university
climbed into the sink with a belay. He untied the manila rope and tied a haul line to
Kuhn with an "equalizing harness." At 4:30 p.m. Kuhn was hauled out followed by
the bus driver. Kuhn was cold but uninjured.
REFERENCES: 1) Art Petit "The Great Hennigh Cave Rescue" Nittany Grotto
News 29:1 Winter, 1981 pp 3-4.
2) Laurie Fedon "Boy Rescued from Cave" Centre Daily Times (State College, PA)
Thursday, January 28, 1982
ANALYSIS: Not much of an emergency. Kuhn was 5 feet tall weighing 250
pounds-this may have been why he was unable to make the ascent.
C: Patton Cave, West Virginia


********** January 30, 1982
On January 30, a group of eight cavers was in Patton Cave, Monroe County,
West Virginia. At the Football Room they got ready to do the 30 foot drop. Fred
Grady (33) felt a call to nature. Looking about, he found what he thought was an
ideal place, near the main passage up on a ledge. As he stood up to rearrange his
coveralls, he fell off the ledge. This was a drop of only 5 feet and though his chest
struck some rocks, he was only momentarily stunned and soon rejoined the rest of
the party.
Seven hours later, on leaving the cave, he started to feel some discomfort. An

---------- Page 7 ----------
x-ray showed he had only bruised ribs.
REFERENCES: 1) Fred Grady "Accident in Patton Cave" The Potomac Caver 25:3
March, 1982 p 37.
2) Fred Grady Personal Communication December 10, 1982.
ANALYSIS: No comment.
B: Sumidero Santa Elena, Puebla, Mexico


********** January 30, 1982
At about 2 p.m. on Saturday, January 30, 1982 a group of three cavers entered
Sumidero Santa Elena, adjacent to the town of Xochitlan in Puebla, Mexico. They
were Warren Anderson (late 20's), Bill Liebman (early 30's) and Dave Walker
(early 30's), part of a group of nine cavers exploring this cave which was expected
to connect to a resurgence cave three kilometers away. The sumidero had been
explored a little over two km from the entrance, past 24 short roped drops
(waterfalls) and 22 swims. When the exploration had begun, on January 12, stream
flow monitoring at the entrance showed six cfs entering. Past drop 8 there are two
tributaries which approximately double the main flow. On the 30th, with dry
weather since the 12th, the entrance flow had dropped to two cfs.
THe group proceeded past drop 24, to drop 25 and on to drop 26 where they
turned back. Moving steadily, they passed through the series of spouting waterfalls
(16-19) above drop 20 where one must negotiate an aid climb on the way down cave
to reach the first ledge past drop 15. If you continue down-cave without doing the
aid climb you quickly reach a cul-de-sac-a sure death-trap in a flood. With
Anderson in the lead, they continued up cave, doubtless relieved at having passed
through the section without ledges. At drop 14 Anderson ascended and began
recarbiding, waiting for the others. Suddenly, at about 1 a.m., there was a surge of
water noise. Thinking his ears were playing tricks, Anderson focussed his electric
on the nearby falls, in time to see a surge of foul, brown water. Walker and
Liebman, approaching drop 14 through chest deep water were caught. Walker
pushed off, thrashed his way to the rope and quickly made it up. Liebman held on to
the wall while Walker and Anderson jumped over to a ledge above him and lowered
a long Jumar sling. Liebman was pulled up.
The ledge they were on was spacious so they settled in to see what would happen.
The flow increased until the very walls were vibrating.
At about midnight there had occurred a torrential rain, which lasted for about 45
minutes, dumping 4 cm. The flow at the entrance had quickly swelled to some 20
cfs, then began to subside. The 20 cfs probably meant 40-50 cfs past drop eight
where tributaries normally doubled the entrance flow. Those on the surface were
alarmed but could do nothing. By dawn Sunday the flow was down to 7 cfs. At 8
p.m. Sunday no one had appeared so a group of three gathered medical and rigging
supples and headed in. The group was found at around 10 p.m., still on their ledge.
Everyone was out by a.m.
REFERENCE: Steve Knutson "Sumidero Santa Elena" NSS News 40:9 September,
1982 pp 236-245.
ANALYSIS: In the Xochitlan area, the weather is very changeable. The day of the
entrapment there was no visibly threatening weather. Since then a program of
keeping temperature/pressure records had yielded a pattern which probably would
have predicted the storm causing the entrapment. Also, it was expected that there
would be some warning signs in the cave before a flood hit. There were none. The
cavers are lucky they were not caught below drop 16.
A: Post Office Cave System, California


********** March 7, 1982
On March 7, 1982 a group of cavers obtained a permit at Lava Beds National
Monument to enter undeveloped caves beyond Post Office Cave in the Post Office
Cave System. Caves in the Monument are named as the portion of a system around
a certain entrance. The entrance to Post Office Cave had collapsed and a sign had
been placed in the passage leading to other parts of the system indicating that that
"cave" was closed.
The cavers entered the Silver Cave entrance to the system, proceeded past the
Post Office Cave closure sign and through a very low, tight crawl into the main Post
Office Cave. In trying to reach a lower level, one of the group fell receiving multiple
minor contusions and lacerations.
At around 1 p.m. Park Service personnel responded to a request for help but
arrived at the tight crawl into Post Office Cave as the victim was emerging. He had
been assisted to that point by members of his own group. He was taken to
Monument Headquarters for first-aid and released.
REFERENCE: Dennis Schram, James Sleznich, Richard Jones "Case Incident
Record" USDI, NPS, Lava Beds National Monument Unpublished Reports March
10, 1982 pp.
ANALYSIS:T accident party had proper equipment for rappelling but were
reportedly using it incorrectly, or not at all, at the time of the accident. It is felt by
the Park Service personnel that the incident would have become more serious if the
victim had not been able to negotiate the tight crawl himself. This might have
necessitated removal of the Post Office Entrance collapse.
B: Fisher Ridge System, Kentucky


********** March 20, 1982
On the morning of Saturday, March 20, the group of cavers at the Toohey Ridge
Fieldhouse formed up into three parties with various objectives in the Fisher Ridge
Cave near Mammoth Cave National Park in central Kentucky. Two groups would
use the Splash Entrance. Joe Saunders was leading Lou Simpson, Doug Stecko,
Tom Patterson and Bill Allendorf on their first Fisher Ridge trip. The second
included Peter Quick, Dan Crowl and Bruce Worthman. The third group was Larry
Bean, Fred Anderson and Barb Shaeffer using the Historic Entrance.
The Historic Entrance group exited at 11 p.m. and noted in so doing that the
Forecaster Dome water flow had greatly increased over what they had seen on the
way in. They debated whether or not to leave the Historic Route drops rigged in
case the Splash Entrance should sump. They decided to leave only the entrance
ladder rigged. When one of them checked the Fieldhouse they found Joe Saunders
and Tom Patterson who had just exited a sumping Splash Entrance. The Historic
drops were soon rerigged. Meanwhile Bill Allendorf, who had also gotten out
Splash, had stayed at that entrance to warn those remaining not to try the virtual,
but not quite, sump.
Joe Saunders' group had split up into groups of two and three and, the group of
three was mapping when they noticed the air flow stop. This had to mean that the
Splash Entrance had sumped. Since this was the only well known route to that
group, they stashed the mapping gear and headed out. Pressure Dome normally
dry, was now flowing a torrent SO they hurried on. At the lead the other faction of
their original group was doing they left a note. The three knew the Historic Route so
communication here was important.
At the Splash Entrance crawl series the three made it through with a minimum
three inches of air space and 15-20 feet of 4-6 inches, there was voice contact all the
way out. Outside they persuaded Allendorf to wait there to keep the other two,
Simpson and Stecko from taking the chances they had. Some time later a storm hit
and Splash was inundated by a three foot wall of water.
Meanwhile Simpson and Stecko had found the note and proceeded toward the
entrance. There they found the extra gear left by the others was gone so they
assumed them to be out. Suddenly there was a roar of water as the storm hit and the
entrance crawl completely sumped. Climbing onto a six foot ledge they tried a
crawlway but found it to dead-end, with water now flowing down it from the way the
had come! They retraced their path to the "main" passage. They were now
confused and blundered about in deep water before recognizing the correct passage
away from the flooding. Soon they slowed their panicked flight and made their way
back into Fisher Avenue. They did not know the Historic Route and so debated the
proper course of action. First they wrung out their wet clothes, putting them back
on, covered by their two emergency plastic bags. They had one carbide lamp
without a tip but fired it up anyway for warmth. They still feared flooding and were
nervous about trying to sleep.
At 3 a.m. lights approached from the north. This was Quick, Crowl and
Worthman, who knew the Historic Route. The combined group exited the Historic
Entrance a
REFERENCES: 1) BIII Allendorf, Barb Shaeffer and Lou Simpson "Trapped in
Fisher Ridge" The Cave Cricket Gazette 7:3 April, 1982 pp 27-31.
2) Joe Saunders "More on the Fisher Ridge Flood" Ibid. p 38.
3) Bruce Worthman "22 Hours in Fisher Ridge" Ibid. p 37.
ANALYSIS: It was overcast when the Splash groups entered but no rain or lightning
were evident and the forecast called for clearing by evening. The Splash was at
normal level. It had been used previously 15 times, but never in the rain. Later
observation showed it to be passable 30 hours after sumping and back to normal 1
1/2 days after that.
C: Haynes Cave, West Virginia


********** March 26, 1982
On March 26, 1982 Mark Johnsson and Pat Maurice entered Haynes Cave in
Monroe County, West Virginia. On the previous day they had finished a survey of
the cave and had returned to obtain geological data. After six hours in the cave they
were on the "lower level" about 50 feet south of the entrance.
Johnsson proceeded up an easy ten foot climb, which he had done twice before.
At the top the "ceiling and/ or wall failed." One large block shifted, temporarily
pinning Johnsson's chest against the top of the climb. A second block (3x2x1 foot)
bounded down the drop striking Maurice, who was ten feet laterally from the
bottom. The rock hit her on the right side, knocking her to the ground and causing
cuts and contusions. Johnsson freed himself and the two left the cave under their
own power. A hospital examination revealed no broken bones or major injuries.
REFERENCE: Mark Johnsson Accident Report Undated 1 p.
ANALYSIS: Johnsson relates that this is the second such incident in Haynes
Cave-in '77 a rock fell breaking the toe of a caver. He points out that the gypsum
in the cave is constantly forming in joints, exerting pressure and causing blocks to
loosen. This is true of any gypsum area in any cave.

---------- Page 8 ----------
B: Crooked Swamp Cave, New Jersey


********** March 27, 1982
On Saturday, March 27, a group of boy scouts of Troop 116 of Millstone Township
visited Crooked Swamp Cave in Sussex County, New Jersey. Their caving leader
was Jim Ewin, a caver of 30 years experience, but Ewin was suffering from a bad
cold and did not enter the cave. The bus driver and overall scout leader was Don
Weltner (48) a New Jersey State Trooper. Weltner's caving experience was very
limited-the only cave he was known to have visited before this trip was Shofer's
Cave near Kurtztown, Pennsylvania. He was reported to be in excellent physical
condition and was of average size-5 foot 11 inches, 160 pounds.
The group first looked at maps of the cave, discussing parts of the system,
including "difficult areas or places to avoid.' All but Ewin spent the morning in
small groups, exploring the constricted passages. Two other adults accompanied
the group but they had no caving experience. The 16 scouts ranged in age from 11
to 16 and about half had previous experience in Shofer's Cave.
Weltner was wearing a long-sleeved shirt and pants with rubber-soled boots. His
helmet had a chin strap but no mounted light. His main light source was a
hand-held flashlight.
The Crooked Swamp Cave has seven entrances but one is not enterable. It is
basically "a horizontal network of passages a few feet below the six base entrances
and fifteen feet below the sinkhole entrance." There is 1250 feet of surveyed
passage, principally low crawlway with some very high but narrow vertical fissures.
The traverse between some entrances is very difficult or impossible. Passage walls
are very irregular with jagged projections. The cave is normally 55-57 degrees but
its shallow nature and air movement coupled with cool weather and cold nights
rendered it cooler at the time of the accident.
Lunch was eaten outside and at that time it was proposed to have a "manhunt"
in the cave during the afternoon, with ice cream as the prize. Accordingly, three
scouts went in first, in an entrance of their choice to get "lost" and evade the
others. After ten minutes the others began the pursuit. Weltner with his two sons
and another scout went in an entrance just south of Tree Root Cave, a part of the
cave system that was connected on the map by dotted lines. Weltner was aware of
this but tried to force the connection anyway. At perhaps 3 p.m. (the time is
uncertain since Weltner first would not admit he was stuck) Weltner entered a
narrow, body-sized crevice, with a small ledge making it wider at the top. He
apparently slipped off this ledge and became wedged in the bottom of the keyhole.
At that point the passage is only a couple feet high and 7-8 inches wide below the
ledge. Weltner's head was downslope from his feet. For the coming rescue
attempt, it was difficult to reach his feet and impossible to reach his head, except
for a very small person, from the Tree Root Cave side.
Shortly after 3 p.m. all but Weltner's group had grown cold and left the cave. An
adult, waiting on the surface entered at 3:20 and learned that the victim was stuck.
A rope was obtained and one end looped around Weltner's feet. Pulling had no
effect. At 4:50 one scout braced the victim's feet and he was able to move forward 9
to 12 inches, until his pants crotch snagged. The victim was already slipping into
hypothermia as his speech had become slurred.
It was thought to lever him up to free him but no suitable board could be found.
From 4:45 to 5:30, outside rescuers were contacted, including the Blue Ridge
Rescue Squad and NCRC. The Rescue Squad notified the New Jersey State Police
who were naturally very concerned and came in force.
t 7:30 p.m. Weltner had become somewhat incoherent and it was recommended
that heat was needed. From that point, numerous attempts to warm the victim were
made but none were successful. These included hot water bottles, gel packs
(chemical heat), a sheet soaked in hot water, a portable electric heater, and a
portable hot-air generator for telephone work in manholes.
By 1 a.m. Sunday, it became clear "that all attempts to stabilize Weltner's
condition by application of heat had not arrested his slide into hypothermia.' Yet
another attempt at pulling him back yielded no result and at 3 a.m. there was no
sign of life from the victim. At 6 a.m. a rescuer was able to get close enough to
detect residual body heat at mid-thigh.
At 6 a.m. it was decided that ordinary extraction would not work and the
go-ahead was given to use "extraordinary" means. This led to a 20 foot shaft being
drilled to intercept the cave two feet from Weltner. Twelve hours later, it was found
that the shaft intercepting the cave has missed the correct spot by 10-12 feet. From
about 6:30 p.m. Sunday to midnight on Monday/Tuesday cavers worked to enlarge
the passage from the shaft to Weltner. A jackhammer, hydraulic rock splitter, and
explosives were used. Finally, early Monday evening, a harness was fitted around
Weltner's chest and he was moved two feet toward the shaft. He could not be
moved further, however, and at midnight it was decided to remove the victim by
quarrying.
Quarrying commenced at 2 a.m. The work involved blasting, backhoe work and
drilling and Weltner received a number of post-mortem injuries in the process. His
body was recovered at 11:40 p.m. Tuesday.
REFERENCES: (Newspaper references are representative, not complete) 1) AP
"Scout Leader Trapped in Cave, Feared Dead" Philadelphia Enquirer Monday,
March 29, 1982 pp 1-A, 8-A.
2) AP "Efforts to Save Spelunker Fail" The Patriot (Harrisburg, PA) Monday,
March 29, 1982 pp 1,2.
3) Anon. "Hopes Dim for Trooper In Cave" Tulsa World Monday, March 29, 1982 p
A 14.
4) Editor "Rescue Crews Try New Tactics in Cave" The Atlanta Journal March 30,
1982.
5) Jim Norman and Sam Rosensohn" Breakthrough, but Hopes Fade for Cop in
Cave" New York Post Tuesday, March 30, 1982 3.
6)AP "Blasting Tried to Free Trooper" The Oregonian (Portland, OR) Wednesday,
March 31, 1982 p A11.
7) AP "Body of N.J. Trooper Removed from Crevice" Philadelphia Enquirer
Thursday, April 1, 1982.
8) Bob Matusik Personal Communication April 3, 1982.
9) Ed. "New Jersey Tragedy" D.C. Speleograph April, 1982.
10) Ed. "Trapped Scoutmaster Dies of Hypothermia" The Potomac Caver 25:4
April, 1982 53.
11) Warren Hall "Letter to the Editor" D.C. Speleograph June, 1982 pp 17-18 (also
Editor's reply).
12) Editorial Untitled Northeastern Caver Spring, 1982 pp 38-40.
13) Editor "Untitled Rescue Report" Speleothemes July-August, 1982 10 pp.
14) Warren Hall "The Crooked Swamp Cave Incident" Northeastern Caver 14:1
January, 1983 pp 3-19 (Also, in slightly edited form in NSS News 41:5 May, 1983 pp
144-149).
15) Richard F. Dalton et al. "Crooked Swamp Caves # 2-3-7" Caves of New Jersey
Bulletin 70 New Jersey Dept. of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Geology and
Topography June, 1976 pp 20-23.
ANALYSIS: When Weltner's body was finally removed, it was reported that a
"piece of rock behind Weltner's right hip had acted as a keystone, thwarting efforts
to move him.' Even when quarrying removed the cave from 3/4 of his body a
come-along was required to completely free him. It is obvious in hind-sight that all
the attempts to pull him back from his entrapment were futile. At the same time,
though some efforts were made to warm the victim, none were successful, and it
seems from the reports that getting the victim free was foremost in people's minds.
And why shouldn't it be? Yet it must be recognized that there are some rescue
situations which are better served by maintaining the victim, then effecting his
evacuation or extraction when the means are obtained or discovered. Thus, if at
first Weltner's rescuers had decided that keeping him warm was to be the primary
objective, and the means had been thus obtained-perhaps a very effecient forced
hot air blower-Weltner might still be alive. This, of course, is hindsight and not
meant to belittle the efforts of rescuers, merely to suggest procedures for the
future.
The responsibility for this accident rests squarely on Weltner himself. He is
characterized as venturesome and "daring.' "In a cave he couldn't get his fill and
tackled small passages or difficult spots without apparent fear or hesitation."


********** Besides this, Jim Ewin suggests the following to have contributed to the situation:
1) The challange of the game of hide and seek they had devised, 2) a desire to
redeem himself for having failed to get through a small passage that morning, 3)
the impassable nature of the crawl, which he may have forgotten or been misled
about by voices ahead, and 4) the great danger of tight passages, of which he was
unaware.
To these I certainly agree. Indeed, the whole thrust of their outing was wrong,
teaching the young scouts and potentially future cavers to be daring-that caves
are places to play games in-instead of teaching them caution and good judgement.
As with climbing, in caving one must learn one's limits. Forcing a tight passage
may be heroic and noteworthy, but it can also be fatal. What goes in doesn't
necessarily come back out.
A: Nita Nanta, Oaxaca, Mexico


********** April 16, 1982
In April of 1982 a group of 17 cavers was on the Huautla Plateau working on
Sistema Huautla, a group of vertically-oriented, very deep caves, which are
hydrologically, and in some cases physically, connected.
On Friday, April 16, six members of the expedition left to return to the United
States. At five entered Nita Nashi for a one day push from the surface. Four,
Ed Holladay, Mark Minton, Doug Powell (late 20's) and Lisa Wilk were to break
camp at -600 meters in Nita Nanta and return to the surface that day. This left two
on the surface.
At about 11:30 a.m. Minton and Wilk started out followed by Powell and
Holladay. Past the "blasted area," a tight place where they had to unpack and pass
gear through, Powell took the lead.
At the 22nd drop, leading to the Narrows, he chose to free climb, with a single
Jumar on the rope, sliding it along as he climbed, for a safety. At 5 p.m., partway
up, Powell had a handhold for his left hand above his head when his foothold(s)
broke. The safety sling was not quite tight and his weight plus that of his camp
duffel (at least 30 lbs) came suddenly on his left arm, dislocating his left shoulder.
There was no immediate pain so he lowered himself to a ledge and called for
Holladay. Holladay arrived and made two unsuccessful attempts to reset the
shoulder. When Wilk and Minton arrived they moved back down two narrow drops

---------- Page 9 ----------
to a somewhat wider place, some 6Wx12Lx10H, and set up a bivouac at about
-330m on the stream-gravel floor. Further attempts to reset the shoulder were
unsuccessful. Sleeping bags were set up on a space blanket and ensolite pads, with
the cave stream flowing through the gravel under the space blanket. Wilk was left
with Powell while Minton and Holladay headed for the surface.
Two hours later, on the surface, they found only Mike Doe, Ted Wilson and
Allejandro Villagomez, an experienced caver from Mexico City. Several days worth
of food, a stove and stove fuel were packed up and transported to the bivouac by
Doe and Villagomez, arriving early Saturday morning.
Powell's shoulder had begun to hurt badly and he was unable to sleep. Some
relief was gained through occasional massaging of the shoulder by Wilk. When the
first surface relief arrived, Codeine was administered but did not entirely relieve
the pain. Doe had a book that showed how to reset a dislocation but two or three
attempts were unsuccessful. Then Doe stayed with the victim while Villagomez and
Wilk headed out.
The crew from Nita Nashi had exited and were briefed on the situation by the
others. Since Powell's condition was stable, they got some rest to be ready if
manpower was needed for an evacuation. Minton and others took the expedition
bus to Huautla to get additional pain killers and a doctor's instructions on how to
reset the shoulder.
Saturday afternoon Holladay and Wilson took additional drugs and food and
stove fuel to the bivouac. Powell's morale was by now a little low. His left knee,
which he noticed as feeling sore the day before, was now red and swollen,
extremely painful to the slightest touch. Vallium was injected for the shoulder and
two hours later they attempted to reset it with no success. Holliday and Doe then
exited the cave leaving Wilson with Powell. Vallium was injected every 12 hours
and this allowed some sleep.
Meanwhile plans were made in case Powell could not make it out under his own
power-calls were made to the United States to establish a rescue liaison and a call
was made to Mexico City which would produce a doctor the following morning.
On Sunday afternoon Hans Bodenheimer, Mike McWhirter and Scott Davis
proceeded in to the bivouac. Bodenheimer had been present at a previous occasion
when Powell had dislocated the same shoulder and had it reset. When they arrived,
muscle relaxants and antibiotics were administered. After two hours, with
Bodenheimer and McWhirter in the proper positions and exerting all their
strength, two attempts were made before the shoulder reset with a loud "pop."
Only a dull ache remained. After a meal, however, chills set in and it became
obvious that the infected knee was a serious problem, though the victim was now
able to sleep.
On Monday the doctor, Artur Pareja Reyes, accompanied by Villagomez and
Wilk, headed in to treat the infected leg. Four other Mexican cavers, two from the
police and two from ISSSTE (Fire Department) had also arrived but were kept with
the surface crew. Pain killers were administered, the arm and leg immobilized with
heavy bandaging, and the victim started out under his own power with some
assistance from his companions.
After four hours and six drops the heavily medicated Powell needed to sleep, so
another bivouac was set up and eight hours of sleep obtained, at least by Powell.
Fortunately the drops above the accident bivouac were well suited to the Texas
method that Powell was forced to use, having only one usable arm and leg. He
reached the surface at about 6 p.m. on Tuesday, April 20. The normal three hour
trip had taken 14 hours.
REFERENCES: 1) Doug Powell Personal Communication May, 1982 pp
2) Bill Steele Personal Communication May 15, 1982 pp.
3) Scott Davis Personal Communication Undated 2 pp.
4) Chris Kerr "Nanta Rescue" Speleotype 15:2 1982 pp 21-27.
5) Editor Untitled Texas Caver June, 1982 p 55.
ANALYSIS: This sort of accident could happen to anyone but Powell might be more
prone to shoulder dislocations since he had suffered one previously. If one has a
disability that can recur "spontaneously" one might be careful to avoid situations
that could lead to its recurrence. In this case, using his ascending rig instead of
free-climbing should have prevented the accident. Carrying a load could lead to a
shoulder dislocation in anyone if they are forced to hold with one hand when
footholds break.
It is fortunate that Powell could leave under his own power-the consensus
seems to be that an evacuation from this cave, with it's many tight places, would
have been very difficult and time-consuming.
A: Buddy Penley's Cave, Virginia


********** April 17, 1982
At about 1 p.m. on Saturday, April 17, four cavers entered Buddy Penley's Cave
in Bland County, Virginia. These were Bill Kelly, Mike Moore, Pete Sauvigne (31)
and Bob Ulfers (20), from Virginia Polytechnic Institute. Sauvigue was by far the
most experienced and was playing the role of leader.
They proceeded down the 120 foot pit, the 30 foot cable ladder drop and the
Crossover Pit. After exploring a bit, looking for a connection to Newberry's Cave,
they started out. The trip in had taken four hours. At the 120 foot pit the noise of the
waterfall had about doubled but they had planned for this (rain was expected) by
rigging that drop so that one could get off at a constriction 90 feet up and serve as a
relayer of communications as the rest came up.
Sauvigne asked Moore to go up and fill this role. At about 5:15 p.m. he had
reached the constriction and moved up over the edge and to the left to rig into the
excess of the 200 foot rope used to rig the drop. At that point a 30 pound rock fell,
presumably dislodged by Moore although he didn't notice such an occurrence.
Below, Sauvigne was at the rope helping Ulfers put on his vertical rig. The rock,
"the size of a football," struck a blow to Ulfers' helmet, then to Sauvigne's arms
and finally Ulfers' foot. Ulfers' helmet was knocked off by the blow and when Ulfers
fell to the floor he struck his head, suffering further head and neck injuries. Both of
Sauvigne's arms were broken and Ulfers was knocked unconscious.
Sauvigne yelled for Moore to get help. Moore communicated that he would and
took off. Toward the entrance the cave is complex and Moore had to take his time
and several times chose wrong at a junction, retracing his steps after reaching a
dead-end. His carbide lamp went out at one point, but was not difficult to relight.
He reached the entrance about an hour and a half after the accident. Calls to the
VPI Cave Club and NCRC got the rescue started.
Meanwhile Kelly, who had been nearby, recharging his lamp, took charge of the
injured cavers. Ulfer's neck injuries kept them from moving him. In the drafts at
the bottom of the drop hypothermia became a problem. Ulfers was unconscious for
about 10 minutes-when he came to he experienced nausea and rolled over a bit to
vomit. Kelly took this opportunity to put some insulation under him. Using plastic
bags and carbide lamps he then kept Ulfers as warm as possible. Both Sauvigne
and Ulfers were in great pain. They passed the time in theological discussion.
At 9:15 p.m. the first of the rescuers arrived at the cave. At 9:30 a group entered
to bring medical supplies/expertise and a sleeping bag to the victims. Then a team
entered to lay phone line. By 10:40 p.m. a phone line was set up to the accident site.
After an initial examination, Ulfers appeared to have a scalp laceration, but no
skull fracture; the shoulder pain seemed to indicate a broken clavical. He
complained of pain in his left side and shoulder. His pupils were equal and reactive.
Sauvigne was cold and appeared to have fractures of both forearms.
While the victims were treated, the pit was rerigged for hauling and to bypass a
narrow crawlway just above the pit. In the process it was found that the new rig site
was somewhat unstable so there was some rock-fall danger.
The medical team with the victims called for a special, flexible backboard, a
KED, for Ulfers. This went down the drop at about midnight. At 12:43 a.m. Kelly
was sent up the 120 foot drop. Meanwhile the best route to the entrance had been
chosen and rigging was going on along this.
At 4:20 a.m. Ulfers was brought up the 120. After being checked by the med
techs he was transported to the entrance by a variety of caver-rescuers. He reached
the entrance at 6:35 a.m. Sauvigne was being hauled up the 12 at that time and was
transported to the entrance shortly after.
Ulfers was flown to a hospital where he was listed in serious condition with
a
depressed skull fracture, two hairline fractures of the cervical spine and a broken
foot. Sauvigue was found to have an open fracture of the left forearm and a
compound fracture of the right forearm.
REFERENCES: 1) Pete Sauvigne Personal Communication August 30, 1982.
2) Robert Rubin "Two Injured Cave Explorers Rescued From Bland Cavern"
Roanoke Times April 19, 1982 pp A-1, 8.
3) Caroline Kane "Two Rescued From Bland Cave" Virginian Leader (Pearisburg,
Virginia) April 21, 1982 pp 1, 12.
4) Chris Peacock "Saved" Roanoke Times April 28, 1982.
5) Detlef Ulfers "Accident in Buddy Penley Cave" The Potomac Caver 25:5 May,
1982 71.
6) Betty Moss "Rescue" Bat Times 2:1 p 12.
7) Editor "Buddy Penley Rescue" Tech Troglodyte Spring, 1982 pp 113-118,
122-124.
8) Robert Logan "Cave Rescue" Letter to Editor Roanoke Times Monday April 26,
1982 A-6.
ANALYSIS: There was a good deal of useful comment about this accident in the
caver press. Sauvigne admits to being "impatient to exit the cave" such that he
helped Ulfers rig in 1) while someone was still climbing above, and 2) directly in the
rockfall path, where he had experienced rockfall before. Apparently they could
have rigged in at a spot sheltered from rockfall.
Ulfers points out that your helmet does not provide complete safety from rockfall.
Certainly it saved his life-the MSA Comfo-cap experienced a collapsed suspension
but the shell was intact. Still, the helmet was knocked from his head allowing
further injuries when he struck the ground. Helmets should not come off in the
process of an accident, and one should change or modify the chinstrap accordingly.
Moss suggests that the presence of Kelly as an additional party member, able to
stay with the victims and offer assistance, may have saved them from succumbing
to hypothermia.
In all, a good example of the power of a simple rockfall to wreak havoc, and of the
necessity of a good caver-manned rescue network. For me, at least, it is easy to
think of times I've braved rockfall just to speed things up a little.

---------- Page 10 ----------
B: Huccacove Cave, Colorado


********** April 26, 1982
At on Saturday, April 26, a group of four or five entered Huccacove Cave,
near Cave of the Winds in Colorado. Some distance into the cave an argument
commenced. James May (21) became angry and told the others to leave him-he
would find his own way out! He had "three flashlights with extra batteries and
(was) dressed in a shirt and jeans, kneepads and sneakers." He had, thus, no food,
water or extra clothes. His companions took his request seriously and left.
On Sunday he had not appeared so they re-entered the cave and after some time,
spied his light. They called out but May's response was to turn his light out. THey
left the cave at about 6 p.m. Two of the party were injured in a fall down the steep
slope outside and required the assistance of El Paso Search and Rescue. None of
the group told the rescue personnel of their crazed companion, still in the cave.
May's mother, however, heard of this accident, realized her son was missing and
informed the El Paso Sheriff's department.
At about midnight, Sunday night, two Search and Rescue personnel, the
manager of Cave of the Winds, and four cavers from the Air Force Academy
entered the cave to find May. Only the Cave of the Winds manager had been in the
cave before. In five hours they searched all the cave on the map they possessed
without finding the victim.
At around noon on Monday, Barney Foster, who had heard of the situation on the
TV news, entered the cave to continue the search. He knew the cave well and
planned to check the upper rear portion which had not been searched. Search and
Rescue would not pursue the matter with him since May was known to disappear
for two or three days at a time but always turned up. No other cavers were
available.
Foster proceeded through a slot ("Steve tried and died") at the back, across a
crevice (leading to the lower area of the cave, already checked) and up into a series
of tight squeezes to the upper part of the cave. At the first of these squeezes he
found a flashlight. Past two small rooms he entered a room with large breakdown
blocks. Here he heard a cough, yelled, got a response and crawled into another
room where he found May, lying on the floor. May had burned everything but his
pants and sneakers to keep warm, and was covered with bruises and scrapes.
Foster gave him an energy bar and some water and they left the cave. May had
been lost in the cave for 54 hours.
REFERENCES: 1) Editor "Notes and News" Caving in the Rockies May-June,
1982 p 34.
2)Barney Foster "Rescue in Huccacove Cave" Caving in the Rockies July-October,
1982 pp 47-48.
ANALYSIS: Foster reports that May was drinking on the way to the cave. Certainly
his reported behavior was very bizarre. When found he was somewhat irrational
and surely hypothermiated. Perhaps he went from the irrationality of drinking
directly to the irrationality of hypothermia and never had the sense to contact his
would-be rescuers. He told Foster of "dreaming of climbing over a stone slab roof
of a house and the police were chasing him.'
There is now better awareness of the necessities of cave rescue by the Search and
Rescue personnel at El Paso and better coordination with cavers. May owes his life
to Foster's dedication.
D: Paul Penley Cave, Virginia
Spring, 1982
In Paul Penley Cave a promising lead was a dome/pit beyond the tight Fender
Bender. The dome/pit is intersected by the entering passage and has a stream
cascading down. A couple of attempts got a bolt ladder part way up above the
belayer but the waterfall lead was on the opposite side and still above. In the spring
of 1982 a light set of scaling poles was constructed and brought to the site by five
cavers. This was set up with it's bottom anchored to the top of the bolt ladder and
it's top over the lip of the waterfall above. A cable ladder had been attached to the
top before erection and ascent was then possible.
With a belay running back through the 'biners on the bolts, Ed Devine climbed
out and up the cable ladder, soaked from the waterfall, but still warm from his
exertions and a "garbage bag undershirt" he was wearing. He made it up the 15
foot climb quickly and checked for continuation. A high canyon passage led on but
the loose rock slope above the falls was very treacherous. Undoing his belay, he
headed on, finding some good leads.
Back at the dome he looked about for a permanent anchor for his descent and
future ascents. There was nothing! The walls were crumbly and the floor was loose
rocks that kept sliding down and over the edge as he walked on it. He would have to
descend with no upper belay-a slip would produce a 30 foot fall, hopefully held at
that point by his belayer.
He was about 10 feet down when the shower of water doused his carbide lamp.
He scrounged through his pack and found his flashlight, then got a few steps
further before the flashlight slipped from his grasp and was lost into the darkness
below. His third source, a Tekna-lite tied to his equipment sling now refused to
work.
The cold shower and his exertions were draining his strength fast. He tried to
reascend but found his belay to be tangled in the ladder. His boots, with speed
lacing hooks, tended to get caught in the cables of the ladder. He was cold and
confused. He yelled for light-he had to rescue himself, he knew that much.
Seconds passed.
A light suddenly shone upwards from a companion who had hung out over the
edge in a difficult spot to illuminate him. He got the rigging and his boots
untangled, his companion burned through a parachute cord equipment-passing line
which was tangled and he was suddenly free to descend. Almost at the bottom, his
strength failed and he fell free, but was pulled up to the passage by his
companions, where he collapsed, exhausted and numb, shivering uncontrollably.
He shortly recovered and the party was able to leave the cave without further
incident.
REFERENCE: Ed Devine "Diddly does the Undone Dome" Tech Troglodyte (VPI
Grotto) Winter, 1983 pp 40-46.
ANALYSIS: Surely here we are getting down to the very essence of what
adventurous sport caving is all about. A classic situation which any hardcore might
hope experience in his caving life. However, for those of more pedestrian
inclination we can suggest that a wetsuit, electric headlamp and boots without
speed lacing hooks would have eliminated some of the excitement. Also, the
vertical set-up, though it accomplished the job, was complicated, with scaling pole,
belay line, cable ladder and parachute cord equipment line all going to the top,
available for tangling.
Even with better equipment, however, don't underestimate the heat(life)-
sapping power of water, even in spray form. A climb like this is very serious caving.
B: Sunnyside Cave, Pennsylvania
Spring, 1982
In the Spring of 1982 a Cornell Outing Club group including Dan Gasteiger,
Melanie Hayes and Lon Kissinger was exploring in Sunnyside Cave, Centre
County, Pennsylvania.
At about 8:30 p.m., while exiting the cave, Kissinger found he could not ascend
the cable ladder past the tight spot on the first drop. His companions tried to help
him but soon realized they were too few and too tired. They "made the victim
warm," gave him their extra food, and left to seek help.
John Coraor of the Nittany Grotto was called and he organized one rescue team
while Will White was called to standby, organizing a second team. The initial team
left for the cave at 10:30 p.m. and arrived on the scene at 11:30.
One rescuer descended the ladder already in place (on belay) while another
remained above the squeeze to rig a second ladder with rungs "slightly offset"
from the first to enable the victim to take short steps while going through the tight
place. The victim started up but found, at the squeeze, that variation in rung
spacing made them even at that point. They then resorted to brute force, with the
rescuer above pulling and the one below pushing and giving footholds. The victim
was out by 1:30 a.m.
REFERENCE: Editor "Cave Rescue in Sunnyside Cave, Bellefonte, Centre County,
PA" Nittany Grotto News 29:2 Spring, 1982 pp 24-25.
ANALYSIS: It was pointed out that Sunnyside Cave is a poor choice for cavers not
experienced in negotiating narrow places on a cable ladder. With any vertical
technique, know it well and it will serve you well. I also feel that groups should have
some knowledge of self-rescue and be able to work their way out of simple
difficulties like this.
The call out was on a Friday night and difficulty was experienced in contacting
rescuers.
D: Ogle Cave, New Mexico


********** May 16, 1982
On Saturday, May 16, 1982 five cavers entered Ogle Cave in Carlsbad Cavern
National Park in New Mexico. After four hours of exploring, they began to ascend
the 185 foot entrance drop. The second caver going up, Terry Hill (25), was 75 feet
from the surface and 35 feet above a sloping ledge that interrupts the drop, when a
rock dislodged from a point 20-30 below. The rock, estimated to be "between 60-70
lbs" and "the size of a car tire," struck the ledge and broke into several pieces
which showered on those below. Everyone dove for shelter and no one was hit. The
rope was checked by Hill for damage and there was no further incident.
REFERENCE: William Bentley "Incident, New Mexico, Ogle Cave" Unpublished
Report April, 1983 p.
ANALYSIS: The rope had been anchored for convenience to an old donkey engine
bolted to the bedrock near the pit. The wall down to the ledge at this point "is
exfoliating and in spots (is) unstable and loose." The group recognized that the
rope should be rigged at some other point to avoid this part of the drop. Areas of
loose rock should always be avoided. If any other anchor point was available, the
first man down should have asked for the rope to be re-rigged, assuming he did not
already know of the rotten wall.
On ascent, if a rock is dislodged and may have damaged the rope below a caver,
the safer thing to do is to pull the rope up, inspecting it (as was done here), or
rappel back down, watching for rope damage, rather than make those below ascend

---------- Page 11 ----------
at their own risk.
D: The Cave, Belize


********** May 28, 1982
On May 27, 1982, while on a caving trip to Belize, Tom Miller and Logan McNatt
traveled from Blue Creek, a small Indian village, to the even smaller village of
Santa Elena. From that point they packed for an extended stay and walked the two
hours to The Cave. They had been to this cave once before, entering for 250 meters
to a drop into a huge room. The entrance is a river sumidero but in May the river
was sinking two miles upstream.
They set up a camp inside the entrance and slept the rest of the night.
The following day, Friday, May 28, they awoke to the start of very heavy rains.
Feeling this was no big deal they began mapping the cave.
At the drop, they rigged cable ladders, needing 45 feet. The room proved to be
some 200 feet across and 100 feet high. A small lake lay below the drop with a small
tributary stream coming out of one wall. Unfortunately they could find no
productive way to continue. One lead produced a climb-up to another entrance and
a high-level bypass back to the drop into the big room. They descended this a
second time, determined to find a good continuation. There was plenty of evidence,
large logs and rounded rocks, to indicate this room sometimes flooded, as much as
30-40 feet above the floor.
Leaving their cave packs under the drop they headed around the lake to check the
tributary. As they did this they heard a "strange roaring sound," which was soft
enough to be attributed to a "change in acoustics" but 15 seconds later it changed
to a rumble, then "a most horrendous Crash-boom!" The result was deafening and
the room seemed to shake. Obviously the river bed was in flood and climbing out
was now impossible.
In 30 seconds they had scrambled to the lead that allowed a climb-up to the
additional entrance they had found earlier, and were soon out. Back at the original
entrance, their camp was gone, taken by the fast, brown waters.
Two days later they returned and recovered some of their gear.
REFERENCE: Logan McNatt "Grim Fairy Tales" The Texas Caver 27:4 1982 pp
67-69, 72, 83.
ANALYSIS: In Mexico/Central America the rainy season begins in May or June.
On May 28 it should be expected. To explore a river sumidero (even a dry one) after
obvious rain had begun is taking a terrible risk. The cavers were lucky to have
found a second entrance just prior to the flood.
A: Leviathan Cave, Nevada


********** May 30, 1982
On Memorial Day Weekend in 1982, a group of six, Bob Richards, Pete Shifflett,
Keith Sinn, Chuck Whitney, Ed Moody and Curt Wheeler set out to visit Leviathan
Cave, high on the side of Worthington Mtn. in Nevada. At about 9 a.m. on Sunday,
May 30, they began the hike from their camp up to the large entrance. This hike
included a 30 foot pitch on which some desire a belay.
The group arrived at the entrance between 12:30 and 1 p.m. and ate lunch before
entering. A 50 foot rope was rigged on the entrance drop, a 30 foot climbable pitch.
At about 1:10 p.m. Ed Moody (37) stood up, fainted and fell down this pitch,
landing face down. Wheeler and Shifflett down climbed at once to Moody. He
appeared to be unconscious and was having trouble breathing. Sinn and Whitney
had the most medical training so they elected to stay with the victim while two of
the other three went for help. At about 1:25, Moody regained consciousness,
complaining of extreme pain in his back and having a wheeziness in his breathing.
At 1:55 the two arrived at camp and left to get help. At a ranch they found no one
and continued on to the town of Rachel, a few trailers and a Bar and Grill. The
owners of the Bar and Grill had a phone number for a helicopter rescue service
called "Flight for Life," which was quickly mobilized. At the cave, Moody
appeared to be dying.
At 4:45 p.m. a chopper arrived, rearranged personnel and headed for the
mountain at 4:50. At the cave entrance the chopper was unable to land, because of
the excess weight. A nurse, Marshall and medical/rescue supplies, including a
litter, were disembarked while hovering at the entrance and the choppen headed for
a nearby mine to refuel for the hop to Las Vegas.
Moody was put in the litter, pulled up the 30 foot pitch and given an IV and
oxygen. Everything was readied for the pick-up. At 6:45 the chopper hovered while
the victim was placed aboard. Within minutes he was at a Las Vegas hospital.
Moody spent the following two days in the Critical Care Unit having suffered a
ruptured spleen, a punctured lung and seven cracked ribs.
REFERENCES: 1) Bob Richards "Flight for Life" The Explorer (So Cal Grotto)
August, 1982 pp 129-133.
2) Ed Moody "And Now a Word from the Victim" ibid. p 133.
3) Ed Moody Personal Communication December 14, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Moody was wearing his hard hat for the hike and suffered no head
injuries in his fall. The fainting spell was due to the hike up to 8,000 feet, squatting
down and abruptly standing up. Moody has recovered and resumed caving, minus
his spleen.
A: Parker's Pit, Indiana


********** June 12, 1982
On Saturday, June 12, a group of Windy City Grotto cavers visited Parker's Pit,
Harrison County, Indiana, arriving at 11 a.m. This was the annual novice vertical
trip, with Parker's the objective because of the drizzle, Parker's having a more
secure lip than the original objective, Jug Hole.
Bob Paterno rigged the low side of Parker's, a 105 foot drop with 330 feet of PMI.
This ran to the right of a six inch diameter tree at the lip and back 50 feet to the rig
point, a tree. A rope pad was rigged to a Jumar on the main line about five feet from
the lip. There was insufficient webbing to rig the pad to a tree.
At the top, everyone was getting their rappel rigs on while Ralph Earlandson, the
most experienced, was helping a novice to construct a climbing system. Greg
Valent, the third experienced vertical caver, headed for Borden's Pit, 300 feet
away, to rig it.
Ted Hartman (32) got his gear on, and went to the rope. He pulled the rope up
four or five feet, to get below the Jumar, and applied a rack, using all five bars.
While doing this he did not at any time inform Earlandson, the only really
experienced one left on top, that he was getting ready to descend.
As he tried to back down the slope toward the lip, he had trouble getting the rope
to move through the rack. Bill Watts, who was watching, suggested removing a
bar. This was done but he was still struggling back toward the lip, feeding rope
through the rack. At the lip, he jammed the bars up, readjusted the pad, and
stepped down to a ledge three feet below the lip. It was now 11:30 a.m.
Leaning back at a 30 degree angle, he tugged on the rack with both hands,
spreading the bars. Suddenly his feet slipped off the ledge precipitating him into an
uncontrolled descent. Watts saw the fall and yelled "Belay!"
On the bottom, Paterno "heard something" then the "zip" of the fall. He
grabbed for the rope, and started to pull in slack. The rope became tight in his
hands at the same time as Hartman hit the bottom.
The victim came to rest with the rack supporting the upper part of his body about
ten inches above the floor. There was no movement. His eyes stared straight ahead.
Paterno ran to him, held up his head and called to him. After a minute Hartman
groaned; after five minutes he became coherent and tried to sit up. Paterno stopped
him and checked for "motor control" in all four extremities. Then he helped him
out of the fall line.
To get a better opinion on injuries, Paterno yelled to to those above to send
Watts, a CPR, down. Watts came down and checked the victim who appeared to be
OK except that he was in pain and felt cold. They covered him with a plastic bag
and positioned him in contact with Watts. Paterno ascended at 11:50 a.m.
Greg Valent ran to the nearest house and called NCRC. Earlandson descended
with water, a sweater and another plastic bag. The victim was covered, with a
carbide lamp for a heat source. At 12:20 p.m. a sleeping bag, first-aid kit and
blanket was sent down. The sleeping bag was placed under him, the blanket over
him and the sweater served as a pillow. Meanwhile the victim's breathing was
short, painful and labored, with pulse fluctuating between 60 and 100. Otherwise
he was stable.
At 1:15 the police arrived and were informed of the victim's condition and need
for a litter. A rope meanwhile was rigged for hauling. The litter arrived at 2 p.m. A
police radio was sent down also, to aid communications.
The lift began with the victim assuming a vertical position as soon as he cleared
the floor. This caused intolerable chest pain and he was lowered again. However,
he steeled himself and when ready, was raised to the lip three feet at a time,
apparently using the available manpower. Paterno ascended a fixed line with the
victim to watch his condition and maneuver the litter.
At the lip a rigid stretcher was eased under Hartman and used to lever him over
the lip. He was immediately given oxygen since it was obvious he was having
trouble breathing. He was carried to an ambulance and thus to a hospital. He had
two fractured ribs but no other injuries.
REFERENCE: Editor "Accident Report" The Windy City Speleonews 22:8 August,
1982 pp 60-62.
ANALYSIS: A grotto committee looked into the accident, offering the following.
The rib injuries apparently were caused by striking a ledge 30 feet down-the only
bruises were to the rib cage. If is felt that the fall was arrested just before the
bottom, either by Paterno's bottom belay or by the rack jamming. All Hartman
remembers is "going fast, trying to jam up the bars, with both hands on the rack"
before losing consciousness. The bottom belay might have been completely
effective if Hartman had communicated the start of his rappel.
The accident, of course, resulted from Hartman's faulty rappel technique. One
should never take the braking hand off the rope unless you have tied off the
rappel-either around your leg or around the rack. Still, the start of a rappel is
sometimes very tricky and it is easy to forget and release the braking hand while
maneuvering
Novices should be supervised but absolute control is impossible. Really, it is the
novice who should make sure he is supervised.

---------- Page 12 ----------
A: Roppel Cave, Kentucky


********** June 12, 1982
At 11 a.m. on June 12, 1982, Kevin Bruno, Danny Dible, Greg McNamera and
Dave Black entered Roppel Cave, near Mammoth Cave National Park in Kentucky.
At about a.m. (13th), after ten hours of surveying below the Rift, they headed out.
At the ascent of the Rift, a deep canyon that cuts across Yahoo Avenue, Black
was last. This ascent involves a 20 and a 46 foot drop, permanently rigged with a
single piece of PMI. All four made it up the 20, Black finding that the upper
ascender knot of his 3-knot rig was grabbing, causing him to have to force it up.
This cased some fraying but at the top, all three strands of the 5/16th Goldline were
still intact. Before starting up the 46 he retied the frayed ascender knot so that the
worn place would not abraid further.
The first three proceeded up the 46 and to the dry spot about 500 feet further on.
Black went up. As he tried to cross the upper lip, however, the frayed sling broke.
As he grabbed the rope to keep himself upright, the other two knots released, and
he fell "at nearly freefall speed" back down the rope. Black let go of the rope and
wrapped his legs around it, slightly decreasing his speed. The other two knots then
either abraided or melted off the rope and he fell free, landing on the bedrock shelf
between drops in a three inch pool of water.
The force of the fall had been taken mainly by his heels and buttocks. After a
minute or so he moved out of the water onto a mud bank. He could discover no
obviously broken bones but it was very painful to put weight on his heels.
His lamp and eyeglasses had been knocked off so he got out a flashlight and
located the missing items. The lamp had to be reassembled but was finally got
going. After more than half and hour the others returned and lowered a climbing
rig. With this Black made it up the drop. It was so painful for Black to put weight on
his heels that he had to crawl much of the walking passage to the entrance. The two
miles took four hours; they emerged at 11 a.m. Sunday (13th). Black's injuries
proved to be only bruises.
REFERENCES: 1) Dave Black Personal Communication May 12, 1983 2 p.
2) Dave Black Trip Report-Roppel Cave unpublished undated
ANALYSIS: Obviously Black's vertical rig was inadequate. A vertical rig must
continue to support the caver if one of it's components fails. Even if the slippage of
the bottom two knots was due to some action of Black's, such panic reflexes should
have no effect on a proper rig.
The main point here, I feel, is that parties should pay close attention to the last
man in line, especially at a point where a serious accident may occur, like a vertical
drop. The last man has no one still coming to help him if he gets in trouble, as
others in a strung-out party would. In this case, if Black had sustained a serious cut,
he could easily have bled to death before the others got tired of waiting and
returned. A rule in caving should be: Always keep track of the person behind you. If
everyone in a party is doing this, the party is "together." A lack of togetherness is
a common occurrence in caving parties.
B: Laurel Creek Cave, West Virginia


********** June 12, 1982
At about 2 p.m. on Saturday, June 12, a group of three cavers from Maryland
entered Laurel Creek Cave in Monroe County, W. Virginia. Some time later the
entrance passage, a stream inlet, flooded trapping the three. They had parked their
car directly outside and when that area became flooded, Bob Roles, the owner of
the cave, called the Monroe County Sheriff. On Saturday night the Sheriff called
Bob Liebman who mobilized a force of cavers. It was obvious, however, that
nothing could be done until Sunday morning when the water level would have
dropped.
Though the main entrance to the cave is a stream inlet, the nearby Hilltop
Entrance affords access to the main passage a little downstream. A trip into this
between 10:30 and noon on Sunday showed things well-flooded. Meanwhile the
rain had stopped and the top of the trapped cavers' car appeared. The water level
was falling rapidly so a push for the Theater Room, where they hoped the trapped
cavers to be, was readied. Three cavers with wetsuits would be sent downstream
with lifelines and a boat would be taken in as far as possible in case the victims were
trying to come out.
The cavers' car had emerged and been towed away. From the gear inside it was
deduced that at least one of them must be experienced.
A phone line from the Hilltop Entrance was laid to the the furthest downstream
dry point. As the wetsuit cavers readied for a 6:25 p.m. push, voice contact was
made with at least one victim in the cave. Everyone was related.
On the the first attempt the push crew ran out of rope short of the Theater Room.
When rope was relayed downstream to them, the wetsuiters moved on, through a
foot of air space into the Theater Room where the trapped cavers were indeed
waiting. They were all tired but otherwise not injured or disabled. They had
panicked when they found the water to be up but calmed down when one of the
group fell into neck-deep water.
Now each was fitted with a life-vest, and alternating rescuer-victim, they hauled
themselves back up the fixed lines. All three were out under their own power by
They had been in the cave about 31 hours.
REFERENCES: 1) Patty Daw "Laurel Creek Cave" The Carabiner Wrap-up 8:6
August, 1982 pp 5-6.
2) George Dasher "More Notes on the Subject" ibid. pp 6, 12-14.
ANALYSIS: It is not clear how the weather looked when the group entered the cave.
Dasher states that the water rose fast. Perhaps the rain was from an unexpected
thunder storm. Most entrapments could probably be avoided if the weather
forecasts were religiously heeded, however. Apparently it is lucky they were not in
the lower levels of the cave. The group showed good sense in waiting for the flood
to subside.
C: Jansill Cave, New Mexico


********** August 7, 1982
Five cavers were in Jansill Cave, Chavez County, New Mexico on August 7, 1982.
As they proceeded down through an area of "crumbly" breakdown, two rocks fell
striking Bill Goodall (32) on his hard hat and foot. Goodall suffered a broken bone in
the top of one foot but had only a sore shoulder and neck muscles to show for the
blow to the head. No evacuation was required.
REFERENCES: 1) Dave Belski "Trip Reports-Jansill Cave" Southwestern Caver
Nov.-Dec., 1982.
2) Carol Belski Personal Communication July 6, 1983.
ANALYSIS: No one saw or heard one rock fall. A warning was yelled for the other
and Goodall moved but was struck anyway. The cavers feel the vibrations from their
travel through the breakdown must have caused the rock fall. An alternate route
has since been found.
D: Roto Rooter Cave, California
August 1982
On August 14, 1982 Arley Kisling and Jim Wolff made a trip into Roto Rooter
Cave, in the Marble Mountains of Siskiyou County, California to check out the
water level in the Sleaze Squeeze, a wet crawl near the furthest point of exploration,
some 500 feet from the entrance pit.
Kisling, having not been in the cave before, thought he would check the crawl
first. Since he didn't have a wetsuit, the two agreed he would be the determiner as
to whether or not they should continue. Kisling sized up the situation and
determined that it wasn't all that wet and proceeded down the crawl. Presently he
came to a point where the down-sloping passage reaches a pool of water, 6-8 inches
deep with 12-16 inches of air space above which allows the caver a chance to stay
out of the water. While bridging across the pool, Kisling's cave pack became
submerged in the pool and a great explosion occurred, knocking him out of his
position above the pool and into the water. His lamp was extinguished.
Wolff was some distance behind, so in the dark Kisling had to grope in his pack
for his second source of light, an electric head lamp. The explosion had broken the
lens to the light, but luckily, not the bulb. However, the battery pack was badly
damaged as well, with a broken latch and hinge. Still in the dark, Kisling found the
four batteries and assembled the pack by wrapping the power cord around it to hold
things together. This was all done before Wolff could get to Kisling with extra light.
Kisling was pretty shaken by the incident and with soaking clothes, imminent
hypothermia in the 37 degree cave and a now-questionable sources of light. They
decided to make their exit.
REFERENCE: Jim Wolff Personal Communication September 28, 1982.
ANALYSIS: As Wolff suggests, 'spent" carbide should not be in a container where
water can get at it. Since it is usually still producing gas, it cannot be put in
something water tight, But should be kept in something that will allow further gas
to slowly escape. As Wolff says, "One should always be aware of the potential
bomb we carry around-how many times have you peeked into your cave pack for
something and used your carbide lamp for the search?"
D: Organ Cave, West Virginia


********** August 14, 1982
On Saturday August 14, Janet McCormick, Larry Lilly, Wes Thorne and George
Dasher (30) entered Organ Cave, in W. Virginia, through the main, commercial
entrance, and proceeded to the Cyclop's Passage about an hour and a half, and one
drop, into the cave.
They went up the Cyclop's Passage taking a few pictures. After 30 minutes
travel, it appeared the passage dimensions were decreasing. They were after
photos of the largest possible passage so they turned back retracing their steps
through 20-30 foot high and wide trunk.
Dasher was bringing up the rear at one point, moving over the floor of breakdown
and came to a short, six-foot climb-down. The top was a small rock slab that
somehow didn't look stable enough to support him. The nearest alternative, he saw
was twenty feet away-to far over "tedious" breakdown. The others had climbed
down on the opposite side of the passage.
Dasher knelt and tested the block, then lowered a leg over the drop and

---------- Page 13 ----------
retested-it seemed secure. Swinging his body over the drop he found "the rock
stayed in place for about a second, then abruptly came loose."
Dasher went over backwards, the 200 pound slab right behind. Fortunately he
was precipitated out far enough that the rock fell not on him, but between his feet.
Unfortunately he bounced, continuing over another drop, backwards. This was
frightening since he didn't know the depth of this drop. It proved to be only five
feet, Dasher landing on his helmet, feet in the air. Only his tripod was damaged.
REFERENCE: George Dasher Personal Communication August 16, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Breakdown to be used as an anchor for ropes or for the sole hand-hold
in a climb must be forcefully tested at all angles. Part of the blame here must be
placed on the rest of the group, however, since the last man in line will tend to feel
rushed if no other group member stays with him. He will thus tend to take chances.
A: Un-named Water-filled Cave, Florida


********** August 24, 1982
On August 24, 1982, members of the Florida State University swim team were
practicing in two water-filled sinkholes in Leon County, Florida. A 20 foot
underwater tunnel links the two water holes. Kenneth Alan Eric Spence (19) swam
through this tunnel twice. On a third attempt he drowned.
REFERENCE: AP "A Man Drowns Attempting to Get Through Tunnel" The
Patriot (Harrisburg, PA) Thursday, August 26, 1982.
ANALYSIS: According to the swim team captain the sinkhole "is a place where
veteran swim team members play a trick on newcomers. They disappear into the
small hole in the ground and reappear in another hole.' That is, this foolishness
was being promoted by veteran members of the swim team, who must therefore
take partial responsibility.
B: Sullivan's Cave, Indiana


********** August 28, 1982
On August 28, 1982, a group of six experienced cavers entered Sullivan's Cave in
Indiana. They "penetrated to nearly the rise of the Sullivan River when one of the
group displayed signs of advanced hypothermia." Three of them went for help
when the victim refused to proceed. The State Police were called and they called
NCRC, who alerted Bloomington and Central Indiana Grotto members. The
Bloomington cavers answered the call accompanied by an EMT, with CIG on
stand-by. The victim was reached and given aid. He eventually left the cave under
his own power.
REFERENCE: Jane Miller "Minutes, September Meeting" CIG Newsletter
October, 1982 98.
ANALYSIS: It may not apply to this situation, but be aware that a victim of
hypothermia, if he is in an environment where he will continue to lose body heat
while moving may be better off to stop. Movement for a hypothermia victim no
longer produces much body heat and may use up the last of the victim's energy,
causing death.
A: Binkley's Cave Indiana
September, 1982
In September of 1982 three cavers were touring Binkley's Cave in Indiana. After
some time they took a breather, all three sitting on a large breakdown slab. When
they got up, the slab, weighing some 4-500 pounds, "slipped about 1 1/2 feet,
trapping the foot of one caver, Cynthia Cain. The other two cavers were just able to
move the rock to free Cain. The foot was bruised and had a tear between two toes
but was not sufficiently injured to prevent her from continuing.
REFERENCE: Tom De Camp Michiana Caver (N. Indiana Grotto) October, 1982 pp
150-152.
ANALYSIS: Breakdown should always be considered potentially unstable.
C: Your Cave, Alabama


********** September 11, 1982
On September 11 a group of cavers were on the way to My Cave on West Point
Mountain in Alabama, when they encountered a new entrance, since named "Your
Cave." Just inside is a slope with unstable talus. John Van Swearingen IV (38)
began climbing down, attempting to clear the slope of loose rock for the safety of
those to follow. Suddenly a large (500 lb) boulder moved, momentarily pinning his
right hand. The hand was mashed and bloody so the group exited the cave, walked
to the vehicle and proceeded to a hospital where the victim displaced numerous
"victims" of a civil defense drill.
REFERENCES: 1) John Van Swearingen III "A Typical, Normal Cave Trip"
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 23:10 October, 1982 76.
2] John Van Swearingen III Personal Communication July, 1983.
ANALYSIS: The entrance areas of caves are often very unstable due to weathering.
The victim was certainly correct in trying to clear the slope. Watch out in those
virgin caves.
B: Cueva de la Colindoncia, Puerto Rico


********** October 3, 1982
On Sunday, October 3, 1982, a group of five cavers entered Cueva de la
Colindoncia in Puerto Rico. An additional person stayed outside while the rest did
the 50 m entrance rappel. They checked leads and explored for awhile, then made
ready to leave. The rope ended in a tangle in space-one of the cavers had earlier
had the person above pull up some gear. Luckily the man outside was still waiting
and let the rope down again without a tangle.
When Mayu Gattas got out her gear, which she had borrowed from a caver not
present, she discovered she didn't know how to put on the 3-Gibbs rig. Her
companions offered advice and help which proved ineffective. The rest then
ascended, set up a hauling system and pulled Gattas up.
REFERENCE: Joe Troester "Cueva de la Colindoncia" Unpublished Report


********** October 4, 1982
ANALYSIS: The entrance is a free drop except for a ledge, 15 m down. Rope will
often tangle if thrown all at once. One should not vertical cave without practicing,
especially if you are using someone else's gear.
C: Culverson Creek Cave, West Virginia


********** October 3, 1982
On Saturday, October 3, 1982, two cavers were exploring in Culverson Creek
Cave in W. Virginia. At a vertical pitch a 25 foot cable ladder had been rigged. One
caver (early 30's) attempted the climb without a belay. Ten feet up she was unable
to hold on and fell, fortunately suffering only minor injuries. They were able to exit
the cave without further incident.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16, 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: The cavers were reportedly very experienced. Still, cable ladders are
SO deceptive-they look easy but, since one is not really attached, when something
happens or one's arms give out, it is only the belay that can save you and cavers
will invariably climb cable ladders without a belay. Given human psychology, I
believe SRT to be the safer way to negotiate vertical drops. In any case, a vertical
technique will not serve you well unless you practice it, perfect it, and don't take
short-cuts when you go to use it.
B: Organ Cave, West Virginia


********** October 4, 1982
On Sunday, October 4, 1982, eight cavers (late teens) entered the Lipps Entrance
of Organ Cave in West Virginia. They explored into Hell's Fissure for a ways, then
returned upstream, wandering into the Maze. At this point, most of their
flashlights failed. There were no back-up lights so two of the group took the two
still-working lights and continued. This pair proceeded through the Maze, down
Skid Row, up Jones Canyon, through The Breezeway, Left-Hand Passage, Handley
Room, Handley's Silo and to the Sand Floor Room. Then they returned to the
register in the Handley Room to wait for help.
Eventually they were missed, and help was summoned. Sunday night Jerry Kyle
was notified and he and two other volunteers entered the cave and quickly located
the group of six, in the Maze as they expected. The group had only one working
cigarette lighter. One member was diabetic and a bit woozy but was able to
exit without assistance, with the others.
The three rescuers searched a bit for the remaining two, then exited and called
for more manpower. A bit later, four returned to the Lipps area to continue the
search there while four more went in the main commercial entrance to search the
Organ-Lipps connection. The latter group soon found the still missing two, who had
burned the register for warmth. They were out by 10 a.m. Monday morning.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982 pp 9-10.
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16, 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Additional manpower was standing by to expand the search if
necessary. To wander about a cave with inadequate reserves of light until one
becomes stranded is extremely thoughtless. Whether one is new to caves or not, it
should be obvious that back-up lights are necessary.
A: Canadian Hole, West Virginia


********** October 10, 1982
On Saturday, October 10, 1982, a group of experienced cavers was exploring in
the Canadian Hole portion of the Friar's Hole System in West Virginia. In the Rocky
Horror Streamway, a loose boulder rolled or fell on one caver's leg, badly bruising
it. With the assistance of the party, the injured caver was able to do the "two hours
of crawling and waterfall climbs" necessary to exit the cave.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982 p 10.

---------- Page 14 ----------
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16, 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: According to Dasher, this section of the cave is wet and cold to the
extent that a party must accomplish self-rescue of an injured member or else such
victim will run a high risk of succumbing to hypothermia.
D: Grutas de Tolontongo, Hidalgo, Mexico
October, 1982
Grutas de Tolontongo is a thermal resurgence cave of unknown extent located
about 40 km NE of Ixmiquilpan, Hidalgo, Mexico, north of Mexico City. In October
Allejandro Villagomez (23) a very capable, experienced caver entered the cave
alone to take a brief look. There is heavy water flow, perhaps 10-20 CFS, but due to
the heat, Villagomez did not wear a wetsuit.
About 40 meters in is a waterfall less than a meter in height. Villagomez made his
way up to this falls along the left-hand wall, in a swim but using handholds against
the current. At the falls, where he intended to climb up he was suddenly sucked
into the plunge of the water where the currents were all circulating back into the
falls at the surface. He tried to swim away but could not. To breathe he was forced
to spring from the bottom of the plunge pool to the surface; there he would grab a
breath, be sucked down and repeat the process. On the third spring, he came up in
the falls and got only water to breathe. At that point he was sure he would die.
What could he do? Then, with lungs bursting with the desire to breathe, and held
under by the currents, his thrashing efforts carried him free, and he popped to the
surface. He then made his way out of the pool.
REFERENCE: Alejandro Villagomez Personal Communication January 30, 1093
ANALYSIS: Heavy water flow is always dangerous. Villagomez" narrow escape
from the plunge pool is due to the fact that somewhere in the hydrologic structure of
the flow, some of the water must be going downstream. But making the right choice
in a desperation situation is pure chance. Better to trust to companions, belays,
flotation devices, etc.
Park's Ranch Cave, New Mexico


********** October 31, 1982
On October 31, 1982, Dave and Carol Belski and Dick and Sandy Gilson entered
Park's Ranch Cave in Eddy County, New Mexico. This was to be a quick tour. Five
minutes into the cave Dave Belski (45) stopped to wait for the others. To pass the
time he climbed a small chimney. When the others approached, he slid back down.
At the bottom he missed his footing on the edge of the ledge level with the main
passage and fell an additional three feet or so, striking his right wrist on a rock as
he did so. The wrist was painful so they left the cave. The wrist proved to be
broken.
REFERENCES: 1) Carol Belski "Trip Reports-Park's Ranch Cave" Southwestern
Caver Nov.-Dec., 1982.
2) Carol Belski Personal Communication July 6, 1983.
ANALYSIS: Possibly one is more accident prone when fooling around on an easy
trip than on a trip which you know to be dangerous such that your mind is focused
on the hazards.
B: Snail Shell Cave, Tennessee


********** November 7, 1982
On November 7, 1982 three cavers (teens) entered Snail Shell Cave near
Murfreesboro, Tennessee, and became stranded. Two other teenagers, who may
have been part of the group, left on the rubber rafts they were using and summoned
help. Rescuers used boats and soon located the missing cavers, who were cold but
otherwise alright.
REFERENCE: From Wire Reports "Searchers Find 3 Chilled Teenagers in Cave"
The Atlanta Journal Monday, November 8, 1982 p 14A.
ANALYSIS: This is possibly attributable to dead flashlights and no reserves of
light.
A: Green Valley Cave, Alabama


********** November 11, 1982
At about 1:30 p.m. on Thursday, November 11, 1981, Becky Brown (18) and
companions were exploring in Green Valley Cave Etowah County, Alabama. About
300 feet from the entrance Brown was attempting to climb a chimney called "The
Slide" when she fell some 25 to 30 feet to the sandy floor of the stream level of the
cave.
At 2 p.m. the Etowah County Rescue Squad was called and a unit arrived at
around 3 p.m. A caver heard the call on a scanner and collected Jeff Steele and
Bobby Whorton and arrived at the cave at 3:30 p.m. By that time the victim was at a
"keyhole traverse 30 feet above the lower level.' The victim was passed through
this fissure, a room, another fissure and reached the entrance by 6:45 p.m. She was
later found to have sustained "lower back injuries, leg injuries and lacerations to
the face and head.'
REFERENCE: Bobby Whorton "Green Valley Cave" Gadsden Grotto Newsletter
3:1 Jan.-Feb., 1983 8.
ANALYSIS: Whorton reports the cavers to have been ill equipped and
inexperienced. He also found the rescue squad personnel to have too few
helmet-mounted lights or proper boots. Their lack of "experience with rope rescue
techniques underground" slowed the rescue somewhat.
B: Friar' Hole System, West Virginia


********** November 13, 1982
On November 13, a group of nine cavers entered Friar's Hole in W. Virginia to do
a six mile through trip, coming out the Canadian Hole entrance to this very
extensive cave system. This is somewhat normal caving, including water crawls as
well as borehole, until the exit is reached where one must negotiate a series of
drops, of 12, 24, 8, 15, and 35 feet. At least the first four were waterfalls at this
time. Before the trip started, these had been rigged, a single rope strung over the
first three, the 15 left as an unbelayed free climb (5.4) and another rope on the 35
foot entrance drop. The first three were rigged with the rope laying right in the
waterfall.
Only the leader and one other wore wetsuits; several had no helmet-mounted
electric light, one had only a carbide lamp-no backup. At least some had left their
regular vertical rigs behind, bringing a lighter set up to save weight on the long
trip. One planned to use prussiks but had no previous experience.
The trip as far as the exit drops was not without incident. The leaders moved
rapidly, others tried to keep up and the caver second most experienced in that cave
brought up the rear. At least a couple tried to maintain the pace of the leaders but
weren't used to it and tired. The group became very strung out, causing confusion
at some points to those unfamiliar with the cave.
At the exit waterfalls, cavers put on any extra dry clothes and they stated up. The
leader went up the first two drops and was quickly out of sight. Two cavers then
proceeded up drop 1 with some difficulty. The next caver had never used prussiks
before. Six feet above the plunge pool this caver got into the falls, the carbide lamp
was extinguished. The prussiks then slipped and the victim slid down into the pool.
It was quickly decided to haul this caver up. Fortunately the victim is of small
build so this was possible. The three then proceeded to drop 2 while the others
followed. Four cavers still in good condition proceeded up drop 2 and hauled up the
victim and another caver who had grown too tired to do the waterfalls. The original
victim was by now nearly exhausted.
Drop 3 was negotiated with a 3-man shoulder stand. The victim was now shaking
violently as hypothermia set in. They moved on to drop 4, the free climb were it was
obvious that another rope was needed to get the victim up. The leader went on out
and was back in 45 minutes with a rope and down vest. With the rope as a belay, the
victim was allowed to climb up. At the entrance pit, the victim was hauled up by a
6-person surface team. To save time, everyone else was hauled up as well.
REFERENCES: 1) John lacovino "In Gary's Wonderland" The Explorer
(Explorer's Club of Pittsburgh) January, 1983
2) Bruce Randall "Chasing Rabbits or How to Precipitate a Cave Rescue (Maybe?)"
ibid. p 11.
3) Bruce Randall Personal Communication July 16, 1983.
ANALYSIS: Bruce Randall makes the point that the party would have been stronger
at the drops if the pace were slower and if there had been no confusion through the
group being strung out. He goes on to say that the victim succumbed to a
combination of factors: "1. only been caving 3 or 4 times before, 2. poorly dressed
for ascending a a rope hanging in a waterfall, 3. not familiar with knots on a wet
rope, and 4. unduly tired from having pushed unnecessarily to chase some rabbits
through the cave."
The group was quite unprepared for the waterfalls. Vertical rigs were varied and
those using knots in some cases did not know how they would work in wet
conditions. There were few electric head lamps and the carbide cavers apparently
had been using muddy cave water in their lamps. This causes sediment plugging of
the water drip-in caves with muddy water always carry carbide water. Lack of
wetsuits was another problem. A waterfall series can be counted on to provide very
slow going to a large group with some inexperienced cavers, so wetsuits would have
helped.
But the best solution, that would have eliminated all real problems, would have
been to go in Canadian Hole and rig the drops so that the ropes lay out of the water
flow.
When taking novices or cavers inexperienced in a technique required for that
particular trip, it is always a question as to whether they can make it or not and
don't forget that their welfare depends on your judgement, not on their decision to
go, ignorant as they are of the conditions to be met. If it had been possible,
time-wise, it would have been good to take the party down the exit series and back
out SO they could experience the conditions and be able to improve their equipment.
Instead, they came to the exit with the choice of doing it, or retreating 6 miles!.

---------- Page 15 ----------
A: Vast Caverns, Alabama


********** November 13, 1982
On November 13, 1982 William Garrett, Linda King (18) and Jeff Machen were
practicing deep pit work to give King more experience. Shortly after noon they
rigged the 227 foot entrance drop of Vast Caverns in Jackson County, Alabama, and
Garrett and King rappelled in. They had only two sets of ascenders so Machen
waited at the top-Garret would ascend and Machen would rappel in with Garret's
ascenders for King to use.
At about 1:25 p.m. Machen rappelled in, unclipped from the rope and moved to
where King was sitting, about 25 feet from the bottom of the rope, "partly
protected by a 50 foot high rock wall." King removed her hard hat for comfort and
the two sat talking.
Without warning a rock fell, brushing Machen's right shoulder and striking
King, who screamed. Machen calmed the victim down somewhat and found that
she appeared to have a broken forearm and an injured, bloody leg, with a minor
abrasion causing some facial bleeding.
Machen yelled for Garrett and he descended with a pack. King was covered with
a space blanket. Garret then went for help while Machen stayed with the victim.
Machen moved the victim under a ledge for more protection and administered
what first-aid he could, making a sling for the arm and wrapping her in the space
blanket.
Garrett returned in two hours and called for his pack so that he could rig the pit
with a pulley for the evacuation. At 4:50 p.m. the rescue commenced. An
ambulance service person rappelled in and he and Machen splinted the injured arm
and leg and got the victim into a Stokes litter, ready for hauling.
The Stokes was rigged with the rescuer directly above it for guidance while
Machen exerted some control from below with a line attached to the litter. As the
litter neared the top a 3-cell flashlight came out of the rescuer's harness but missed
Machen, below. The victim reached Jackson County Hospital at 8:05 p.m. The arm
had a broken bone but the leg only a deep puncture wound.
REFERENCES: 1) William Garrett "Rescue at Vast Caverns" Gadsden Grotto
Newsletter 3:1 Jan.-Feb., 1983 pp 5-6.
2) Jeff Machen "Accident Reports-Vast Caverns" ibid. pp 3-4.
3) Dave Teal "Analysis" ibid. 1.
4) William Garrett Personal Communication June 14, 1983.
ANALYSIS: The call-up complicated and the Sheriff's Office never called caver
rescuers. Thus Garrett and Machen became essential parts of the rescue, providing
most of the know-how.
Teal points out that the pit has obvious instability around the upper part. Since
falling rocks can bound laterally for some distance, 25 feet is not far enough
removed from the drop for safety. Certainly, once the two were down they should
not have remained thus exposed for "conversation." Obviously, removal of one's
hard hat in such a location is foolish.
A: Lisanby Cave, Kentucky
November, 1982
In late November, 1982 three cavers entered Lisanby Cave near Princeton in
Caldwell County, Kentucky. They apparently planned to stay in the cave overnight,
as is done on occasion by locals, and built a fire a short ways inside. One of the
group (age 18) was epileptic and unfortunately suffered a seizure. His companions
"either panicked or simply left him alone while seeking help. While unattended
the victim fell into the fire and suffered serious burns. He was reportedly evacuated
by local rescue authorities.
REFERENCE: Mike Dyas Personal Communication March, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Anyone prone to any occasional physical malfunction should alert his
companions to proper remedial procedures before a trip.
D: Huccacove Cave, Colorado


********** November 21, 1982
On November 21, 1982, five cavers were in Huccacove Cave in Colorado on a
cleanup trip. At 2 p.m. as they were ascending Angel Falls on the way out, "the
upper overhang (dried mud), about two feet in diameter, broke off at the base."
This shattered on an overhang four feet lower, and buried the climber coming last
from the shoulder to the top of his hardhat, the mud fragments filling in the spaces
around him in the slot he was ascending. He descended to relieve himself of the
loose material and continued out. He suffered only slight bruises on his head from
his hardhat.
REFERENCES: 1) Lee Schrock "Incident Report" Pueblo Underground (S. Colo.
Mtn. Grotto) Jan.-Mar., 1983.
2) Editor "Incident in Huccacove" Speleo-Flyer (USAFA Grotto) 1:1 February,
1983 p.
ANALYSIS: The ascent was being done with cavers on the two overhangs to help
novices and help pass trash bags up. A novice had just stepped onto the upper
overhang when it collapsed. Schrock speculates that very dry conditions may have
weakened the dried mud of the overhang. Many cavers had used it previously with
no problem. He also observes that more than one caver making a climb at the same
time is a poor practice.
D: Un-named Pit, Oregon


********** November 27, 1982
On Friday, November 25, Larry Ritchey (34) began a projected three day hike
through the winter wilderness on the north slopes of Mount Hood in the Cascade
Mountains of Oregon. He was warmly dressed, with long underwear, wool pants
and shirt, parka, mittens and rubber soled boots, and equipped with food and
shelter. He left an itinerary with friends, planning to be back by Tuesday the 29th.
On Sunday the weather produced snow and as he slowly snow-shoed along, he
suddenly plunged into a snow-covered hole, falling 12-14 feet, landing on his back.
His pack prevented injury but, after lighting one of several candles he had, he
found himself at the bottom of a pit about ten feet in diameter, with overhung walls,
with a stream of water swirling along the floor. It came from a passage which he
explored for 200 feet without finding an exit. Moreover, there was no air movement
so he returned to the pit.
After eating (his stove was smashed so food was eaten without cooking) he got
out a 30 foot rope he had brought and realized a rock tied to one end might catch in
the boulders outside if thrown up through the hole.
For the next three days he threw his makeshift grappel to no avail. The first two
nights he slept standing up, feet in the water. The third night he hung in a loop of
the rope, suspended from a tree root.
On Tuesday evening Ritchie's absence was reported to the Hood River Sheriff's
Office. On Wednesday searchers on snowmobiles traced his hike plan but new snow
had covered his tracks and fate. Helicopters were ineffective due to fog and bad
weather. Ritchie was on his own.
By Thursday he had consumed all of his food and was beginning to slip into
hypothermia, with slurred speech and an unsteadiness to his limbs. But that day he
got lucky. The rock at the end of the rope snagged the limb of a dead tree, and he
hauled himself free. It was raining but he dared not stop. He slogged ten miles to
Highway 35, caught a ride and finally was safe.
REFERENCES: Anon. "Missing Hiker Reappears After 3 Days in Hole" The
Oregonian Saturday, December 4, 1982 p D4.
2) Peter Michelmore "A Stone's Throw from Life" Reader's Digest May, 1983 pp
107-112.
ANALYSIS: Certainly this points up the importance of being prepared for
emergencies, especially when engaged in a solo activity. Some, like Ritchie, survive
ordeals like this; others, in the same circumstances, would not. Attitude is very
important.
B: Harmon's Waterfall Cave, West Virginia


********** November 28, 1982
At around noon on Saturday, November 28, 1982, a group of five cavers entered
Harmon's Waterfall Cave in W. Virginia. After exploring for some time, they had
difficulty in discovering the route back to the entrance. When their carbide supply
ran low, they sat down to wait for help.
Late Sunday afternoon a cave search was mobilized and six cavers responded,
one of whom was familiar with the cave and had brought a map. Though it was
raining hard the main part of the cave is dry and no flooding was expected. Eight
hundred feet of "semi-crawling, tight" passage leads from the 25 foot entrance
climb-down to a junction. If the lost group was not encountered at that point, the
rescuers would split into three groups of two to sweep the known cave.
At the junction they heard voices and soon encountered the stranded cavers, who
were led out with no further incident.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982 p 10, 15-16.
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: The cavers were "experienced outdoors people with a minimum of
caving experience," who should have had greater light reserves, but did the right
thing under the circumstances.
Further Minor Incidents
B:Bear Plunge Pit, Indiana
August, 1981
A caver rappelled the 76 foot entrance pit on a rope that fell 10 feet short of
reaching the bottom. He was warned by another group in the cave. Another
rappelled in with sufficient rope but no light. He had to be assisted (light) in
attaching his vertical gear for ascent.

---------- Page 16 ----------
D: Carcass Pit, Indiana
September, 1982
While preparing to ascend the 70 foot pit, a caver was nearly struck by a falling
oppossum.
D: Indian Cave, Kentucky


********** November 14, 1982
A carbide dump bag explosion set a jacket on fire while cavers were using inner
tubes for floatation in low air space. The jacket was extinguished by submerging
the caver.
D: Fisher Ridge, Kentucky
November, 1982
On Thanksgiving weekend a group exited to find only eight inches of air space at
"Splash," apparently just escaping entrapment. It rained considerably the next
two days.
1983 Graphic Arts Salon
Results
Photographic
Medal Winner: Oklahoma Grotto (Central Oklahoma Grotto) No. 9
Merit Award: California Caver (Western Region) Vol. 33, No. 3
D.C. Speleograph (D.C. Grotto) Vol. 38, No. 5
Honorable Mention:
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter (Huntsville Grotto) Vol. 23, No. 6
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter (Huntsville Grotto) Vol. 23, No. 7
California Caver (Western Region) Vol. 33, No. 2
The Brass Light (Richmond Area Speleo. Society) No. 8
D.C. Speleograph (D.C. Grotto) Vol. 38, No. 6
Non-photographic
Medal Winner: Guano Gazette (Annapolis Grotto) Vol. 6, No. 2
Merit Award:
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter (Huntsville Grotto) Vol. 23, No. 8
York Grotto Newsletter (York Grotto) Vol. 19, No. 1
Northeastern Caver (Northeastern Region) Vol. 13, No. 1
California Caver (Western Region) Vol. 32, No. 4
Southwestern Cavers (Southwestern Region) Vol. 20, No. 2
Southwestern Cavers (Southwestern Region) Vol. 20, No. 5
Southwestern Cavers (Southwestern Region) Vol. 20, No. 6
Guano Gazette (Annapolis Grotto) Vol. 6, No. 1
Honorable Mention:
Electric Caver (Greater Cincinnati Grotto) Vol. 17, No. 2
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter (Huntsville Grotto) Vol. 23, No. 3
Gross-Out (Greater Randolph Organization of Speleological
Science) Vol. 2, No. 2
Pack Rat Scat (Greater Allentown Grotto) No. 6
Pack Rat Scat (Greater Allentown Grotto) No. 7
Pack Rat Scat (Greater Allentown Grotto) No. 9
Southwestern Cavers (Southwestern Region) Vol. 20, No. 3
Southwestern Cavers (Southwestern Region) Vol. 20, No. 4
I'd like to thank all the organizations that entered this year's Graphic
Arts Salon. Several changes are probably noticeable in this year's salon.
The award schedule has been changed to reflect that of the NSS Photo and
Cartographic Salons.
Medal winners and merit award winners were matted for display at the
convention to enhance their presentation. All of us who present this salon
express our appreciation to those who participated, and we look forward to
an even better salon next year.
John Baz-Dresch, Salon Chairman
NOMINEES SOUGHT FOR HONORARY,
outstanding individual, please send suggestions
OUTSTANDING SERVICE AWARDS
for possible recipients to Jeanne Gurnee of the
In the spring of 1984 the NSS Board of
Awards Committee, including description of
Governors will consider the names of possible
this person's qualifications and achievements.
recipients of the highest honors the Society can
Honorary membership is awarded for high-
give: Honorary Membership and the Outstand-
est service to the science of speleology. Life
ing Service Award. In order to receive as many
Membership is also conferred on the recipient.
nominations as possible and not overlook any
Outstanding Service Award carries equal
C: Nunnally Mountain Cave, Indiana
April, 1982
A caver suffered a minor facial cut when struck by a small rock while ascending a
rope.
D: Roppel Cave, Kentucky


********** June 12, 1982
A caver tripped, striking his head and was badly stunned.
D: Roppel Cave, Kentucky


********** June 12, 1982
A carbide dump bag exploded.
WILDERNESS SUBCOMMITTEE
continued from p. 253
timber resources. The House committee report stated that less than two-
tenths of a percent of the total commercial forest land in Alabama was
located in the proposed wilderness. Arizona - Wilderness bills have been
introduced in both the House and Senate. The bills grew out of discussions
between the National Parks and Conservation Association and a mining
concern, Energy Fuels Nuclear Inc. Their talks led to meetings with other
Arizona conservationists, industrialists and community leaders, and the bills
enjoy solid support. Arkansas - Both the House Interior and Agriculture
committees heard testimony on the Arkansas wilderness proposals.
Conservationists support HR2917, introduced by Rep. Ed Bethune, which
designates 11 areas as wilderness and contains standard sufficiency
language. The other bill, HR2452, introduced by Rep. Beryl Anthony,
contains unacceptable release language, and designates seven wilderness
areas. California - The late Rep. Phil Burton's bill, HR1437, was passed by
the House. It is nearly the same as the California wilderness bills that passed
the House in the previous two sessions of Congress, but died in the Senate
because of the opposition of former Sen. S.I. Hayakawa. A similar bill, S5,
was introduced by Sen. Alan Cranston. S5 is similar to legislation Cranston
introduced in the last Congress, with the addition of Tuolumne River
Canyon. The bill contains the compromise "sufficiency" language that
would settle the dispute over the adequacy of RARE II. The "release"
language frees the Forest Service from reevaluating roadless areas until the
mid-1990s. Rep. Robert Walkner, R-Pa., offered a weakening amendment
to allow the Secretary of Agriculture to waive any provision of the legislation
(that is, remove any area from wilderness consideration) if the secretary
determined it contributed to unemployment. The Walkner amendment was
defeated. Sen. Pete Wilson thought the S5 bill contained too much
wilderness, so he introduced his own bill. Florida - The House passed HR9.
Senators Lawton Chiles and Paula Hawkins support the wilderness bill, and
were expected to press for early Senate action. The bill has been before
Congress in various forms since 1974. The measure passed both the House
and Senate last year, but was vetoed by President Reagan. The
Administration opposes closing Osceola to mining. The bill includes
wilderness designation for seven forest areas, including part of the Osceola.
Idaho - Senate Energy Committee field hearings have been scheduled on
Idaho wilderness proposals. Indiana - The decision to allow oil and gas
leasing in the Hoosier National Forest before completion of the Forest
Management Plan, an environmental impact assessment and a 60-day public
comment period was reversed. There had been strong public opposition to
a proposal to initiate oil and gas leasing before the release of environmental
studies for the southern Indiana forest. Geologists report the area has little
oil and gas. Michigan - Congressman Dale Kildee introduced a bill
to designate 90,000 acres in 11 areas as wilderness, including the Sturgeon
River Gorge. Missouri - The House passed HR2170 to establish the Irish
Wilderness in the Mark Twain National Forest. The Senate passed a similar
bill that includes an additional 2,000 acres. Missouri conservationists oppose
the 2,000-acre concession to lead mining interests in the House bill.
importance and is usually conferred upon a
member of the NSS, as it honors individuals
who have given outstanding service to
speleology and to the NSS. This award also
includes Life Membership.
Please send nominations before Jan. 31,
1984, to Jeanne Gurnee, 231 Irving Ave.,
Closter, NJ 07624.

---------- Page 17 ----------
CAVES & CAVING
state
MSS President Dwight Weaver advises
that good progress continues on catching up the
Missouri Speleology series, thanks in part to an
MIKE DYAS
anonymous $1,000 gift toward the J Harlen
Bretz memoirs. A Crawford Country report is
now out and several other overdue volumes in
various states of completion, giving hope that
MS may soon be back on schedule for the first
One of Bob Taylor's very first caving trips
time
in
a
decade
Tex Yokum marked his 61st
was to the back section of commercialized
birthday on March 6 by - what else? - caving
FANTASTIC CAVERNS, just north of Spring-
with friends in Perry Country. They're mapping
field, Mo., in 1962. The cave was discovered a
multi-level PARKER CAVE
century earlier but wasn't mapped in earnest
updates the status of various projects under-
until Don Rimbach and companions produced
taken by Southeast Missouri Grotto, particu-
some two kilometers in 1966. They also tackled
larly in Pulaski and Shannon counties. Work in
SMALLEY SINKHOLE CAVE, which lies a
more than one cave is limited by grey bat
short distance south of Fantastic and was
maternity colonies, including PIQUET CAVE,
suspected to connect, at least hydrologically
the map of which is being drafted to show some
(later verified). But Smalley's wet, cherty crawls
seven kilometers.
and sumps were to discouraging. Nearly 15
more years lapsed before Taylor and Ozark
Keith Ortiz is back on the subject of reported
Highland Grotto became interested in the
safety shortcomings in Kentucky's FISHER
system. They took advantage of an early 1981
RIDGE CAVE SYSTEM in Detroit Urban
drought to push into more inviting new sections
Grotto's April DUG Scoops. A recent new-
of Smalley Sinkhole, mainly to the south (i.e.,
comer to the project remarked that the Fisher
away from Fantastic). Rains came before the
Ridge project is "the least safety conscious I've
presumed connection crawl to Fantastic was
seen" - which Ortiz takes as basically a
attempted. About 1.1 kilometers was mapped in
compliment. He sees that active cavers usually
Smalley as cavers settled back to await another
ignore safety lectures, taking for granted that
dry spell, with potential leads (sumps and digs)
most are authored by "bureaucrats." Keith also
in both directions. Bob's summary, with geo-
states he's not worried about improving his own
logical and hydrological analysis, is featured in
practices. Just the same, he agrees to be more
the recently published Ozark Underground
careful about coaxing novices into situations
for 1981.
where they may get in trouble; and says that
Abstracts from spring issues of Missouri
better protection at several vertical hazards in
Speleological Survey's MSS Liaison (March
FRCS might be appropriate. Changing the
subject a bit, Keith notes new evidence that the
through May): the state has published "An
Inventory and Evaluation of Missouri's State
real threat of lung cancer to smokers may be
Parks Cave Resources" (93 caves in all), the
atmospheric radon, which cigarette smoke
seemingly concentrates. Given the radon scare
product of several years labor by Gene and
Treva Gardner. The Division of Parks also has
in caves a number of years ago, Ortiz concludes
that cavers have a particular incentive to break
prepared a management plan for Onondaga
the habit
According to Dan Crowl in his
Cave State Park, with input from several
monthly FRCS update, the cave went past 33
cavers. Among good ideas is to relocate parking
kilometers (20 miles, more-or-less) in mid-
lots to prevent possible run-off into the cave
April. A key move was dropping from MoFo
A new map by the high school South Side
Grotto of St. Louis' CLIFF CAVE has been
Domes into a new stream trunk, which may or
may not be part of Stinky River.
completed, with aid from Tex Yokum. About
1.5 kilometers has been surveyed in what's
Northern Indiana Grotto members haven't
probably the most heavily visited cave in the
got down to Tennessee's DUNBAR CAVE too
NYLON HIGHWAY'
By Dave Foster
A high quality stereo recording produced in a professional studio in
Tennessee. Many of these songs have won acclaim nationally at the
NSS Cave Ballad Contest. This could be the best album in the history of
cave ballad recordings. Ask the caver who has bought one. Numerous
rave letters have been received from cavers across the country.
Songs are: "Nylon Highway," "Ballad of the III Fated Caver," "Damage
Done," "Over the Mountain" and five others.
Send $8.00 postpaid to RASS Records, P.O. Box 7017, Richmond, VA 23221
All proceeds go to cave conservation and the NSS Save the Caves Fund.
often lately. They did make it last Thanksgiving
and were concerned to find evidence of "non-
organized" cavers: fresh spraypainted arrows
in old Dunbar and litter in the Roy Woodard
extension. Fortunately, these visitors - most
likely local youths - didn't find their way to
Woodard's formation rooms. Information
from Keith Dunlap and Jeff Steinbach in the
Michiana Caver (January-March issues).
On the occasion of his book Trapped! (co-
authored by R.K. Murray) being issued in
Scott House
paperback by the University of Kentucky press,
Roger Brucker offered an afterword on "What
Really Killed Floyd Collins" (Central Ohio
Grotto's April COG Squeaks, reprinted by
Miami Valley Grotto in the May Cave Cricket
Gazette). Roger believes that Collins didn't cave
alone by preference; but by the time of his
downfall, his compulsive style had burned out
so many friends and relatives that the only way
he could explore was solo. Brucker also
theorizes that the immediate cause of Floyd's
death wasn't hypothermia, as long been taken
for granted. SAND CAVE has been known to
flood, and a heavy rain shortly after the man
was last seen alive (and the cave partially
collapsed) may have drowned Collins
There's considerable evidence that the contro-
versial landfill over parts of the SLOAN'S
VALLEY CAVE SYSTEM (Pulaski Co., Ky.)
GIBBS
ASCENDERS
Free
Spring
Gibbs Products
Running
Loaded
T-Shirts
Each Ascender is tested to 1000
pounds. Its smooth rounded
teeth produce little or no rope
damage. Especially applicable
to equipment haulage, group
ascents, fixed rope and rescue
operations. Operates on icy or
muddy ropes.
Write for
Free Brochure
GIBBS PRODUCTS
202 HAMPTON AVENUE
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH 84111

---------- Page 18 ----------
is causing the sort of bad effects feared by
vertical cavers (possibly as part of the "Caver
Debbie Campbell and other neighbors. Tests of
Information Series"), the article includes
ground water in the area, including from the
pointers that even veterans may find useful. For
cave, show markedly higher bacterial and
instance, they instruct that aluminum brake
nitrate pollution since the dump opened. At the
bars are light and cheap and may be preferred
same time, farm animals have mysteriously
for long drops since they dissipate heat better
sickened or died after drinking suspect water.
than steel. But aluminum also wear relatively
The residents' legal appeal remains mired in
fast and may be too "slow" for short or muddy
governmental red tape.
pitches (particularly for lightweight cavers). It's
Attempts to objectively index the world's
feasible to mix aluminum and steel bars in some
longer lavatubes have been vexed by the
applications, for instance steel for the top bar or
tendency of such caves to break into more-or-
two. Aluminum bars should be retired when
less distinct segments and the inability of
worn one-third through and steel bars when
students to agree on how this problem should be
half.
approached. Rod Crawford has been wrestling
Jerry Thornton shares some of the frustra-
with this for some time and offers recommenda-
tions and fun of cave hunting in Idaho with
tions to the NSS Section on Cave Geology and
readers of the April-June Gem (State Grotto)
Geography in the Winter 1983 Geo. He'd like
Caver. Generalities include: (a) high elevation
to see the standards of the International
leads are mostly hopeless due to frost shatter-
Commission on the Greatest Caves (Claude
ing; (b) low elevation openings, if visible at all,
Chabert, et al.) applied to lavatubes. This
usually lead to caves no longer than the entrance
would mean, among other things, that a
is wide (notably in Hell's Canyon); (c) a great
collapse which is wider than deep definitely
many Idaho caves are obstructed by packrat
divides a lava cave into separately counted
nests and amberat deposits; (d) you probably
segments. Still not resolved would be the case
have as good a chance of finding a significant
where a cave roof has only partially fallen in,
cave by the roadside as far off in a trackless
leaving an extended overhang on one side.
wilderness.
Using his proposed standards, Rod lists the
Joel and Carol Sneed have found Pleistocene-
world's 21 longest lava caves (more than two
kilometers each), with several well-known caves
age bones in another cave in northern Georgia,
known either to be segmented or not actually
as reported in the Clayton County Cavers'
surveyed deleted. Virtually tied for first place at
Monthly Breakdown for May. YARBROUGH
a bit over 11 kilometers each are BILEMOT
CAVE (Bartow County) is small in itself and
GUL (Cheju Island, South Korea) and KAZU-
was mined for niter, as attested to by ceiling
MURA CAVE (Hawaii), neither of which is
soot and excavation that lowered the original
completely mapped. In third place at 9.15 kilo-
floor considerably. As was also the case at
meters is the upper portion of Kenya's LEVIA-
nearby KINGSTON SALTPETER CAVE, it
THAN CAVE, which also is easily the deepest-
was mining that gave access to the Pleistocene
known cave of this type -480 meters).
remains, although much must have been
destroyed in the process. Yarbrough has so far
Bruce Smith was asked recently by a heavy-
yielded evidence of an extinct giant armadillo.
set friend to design him an appropriate rope
climbing system. The 135 kilogram man was un-
When cavers began visiting Menard County,
able to effectively use standard ascending set-
Texas, in the early 1960s to explore POWELL'S
ups due to leg strength or balance problems.
Bruce started with a special seat harness for
MANY POST-CONVENTION ACTIVITIES
extra support. Next, it was determined that the
AT FRIARS HOLE CAVE PRESERVE
"portly prusick" would require a sit-stand
approach. The solution: a lower ascender with
Post-Convention activities at Friars Hole
equal knee-length stirrups, allowing both legs to
Cave Preserve in Pocahontas/Greenbrier
lift together; and a shoulder-positioned upper
counties, W. Va., began Saturday, July 2.
cam which rides up unaided. The system was
A cave geology trip into Snedegars Cave was
successfully tested in several well-known TAG
given to members of Bill Jones' and George
pits. Also in the NSS Vertical Section's Nylon
Deike's karst hydrology field trip by Steve
Highway No. 16 is an excellent guide to rappel
Worthington and George Deike. The next day
racks by Steve Hudson and Toni Williams.
the field trip continued south to look at the
While written for rescue personnel or beginning
resurgences for the Friars Hole Cave System
and to conduct a dye trace led by Bill Jones on
lower Spring Creek.
Caves
At least 15 Californians visited the preserve.
Most of them were guided on a through trip by
of Virginia
Dave Bunnell and Carol Vesely, entering at the
Friars Hole entrance and then exiting at either
the Snedegars or Canadian Hole entrance.
Later in the week, Dick La Forge and Dave and
768 pages - 1790 caves - 54 pictures
Carol gave a stereo slide show.
69 cave maps - 107 topographic
Roy Jameson led the Kastnings and Raines
maps with limestone and caves indicated
on a geology trip into the North Canyon and
Bibliography of cave literature,
other parts of Snedegars cave.
1782-1960 - Special articles on conser-
As for mapping activities, by Tuesday
vation, geology, biology and saltpeter
evening some 900 feet had been added to the
caves - Handsomely bound in rugged
system. K. Goggin and Dick Graham squeezed
buckram. $12.
past a constriction in the pendulum passage off
Order from:
Toothpick Pit, mapping 300 feet. In northern
VIRGINIA CAVE SURVEY
Canadian Hole, Roy Jameson, Patty Mothes
115 W. Cameron Road
and Steve Worthington mapped leads off a new
Falls Church, Virginia 22046
room - the Firecracker Room, which is to one
side of Skid Row.
CAVE, they became aware of a potentially
large cave at a silver mine in operation for
several generations. Here, much floodwater
drains into a creekbed sink known as the Egg-
Shaped Basin, and several mine shafts inter-
sected cave passage. But the cave appeared to be
flooded and was ignored. Eventually, however,
pumping at the mine reduced water levels, and
the owner, W.N. Merrick, explored the cave for
a considerable distance. Merrick reported this
to Pete Lindsley, who checked out the initial
cobble crawl of SILVER MINE CAVE with his
cave radio. Merrick encouraged further ex-
ploration and survey, in hopes of finding
another entrance and a water source on a dis-
tant pasture. After several hundred meters of
crawl and the watery crevice called the Wiggle-
Woggle, the main passage was intersected, and
after that an upper level and stream trunk. The
latter was extended in mid-1982 (the Missing
Link passage) when a breakdown downstream
was penetrated. At present, Silver Mine has yet
to yield a back entrance or trend directly toward
Powell's Cave. Several key leads require exca-
vation but potential is great. Bill Russell's
summary accompanying map (as of May 1983)
by University of Texas Grotto members appears
in The Fault Zone No. 5 (Oztotl Appreciation
Society), which also includes a recap of renewed
Texas Speleological Association activity in the
Langtry area of far-western Texas. BIG TREE
(LANGTRY LEAD) CAVE is being remapped
and has been determined to be slightly less deep
(106 meters) than originally thought. LANG-
TRY QUARRY CAVE is being resurveyed also
and apparently is more extensive than assumed.
According to Mike Johnson in Dayton Area
Speleological Society's March-April (John-
house News), a noxious smell appeared in
WELLS CAVE (Pulaski Co., Ky.) in mid-
1982. Evidently it was caused by a fuel oil
spill at a nearby sawmill and prompted a large
number of bats to move from their preferred
hibernating roost either to another cave or
unknown parts of Wells. The smell eventually
improved, and some bats returned this past
winter.
LET UNCLE SAM
HELP PAY FOR
OUR OFFICE!
If you plan to itemize deductions for your
1983 taxes, remember that making a contribu-
tion to the NSS Office Addition Fund is tax-
deductible. Depending on your tax bracket,
Uncle Sam will, in effect, be making a contri-
bution of several dollars to the fund out of
each $10 you give.
For every $10 contribution you make, you
will "buy a brick" in the new office building
and receive a certificate expressing the appre-
ciation of the Society. For a $75 contribution
the NSS will send you one of the limited-
edition reproductions of Tom Culverwell's
drawing, "Traverse of the Hodag Room."
DON'T HESITATE to give what you can.
To be deducted from your 1983 taxes, your
contribution must be made by Dec. 31. Send
your check to the NSS office, Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, AL 35810, and designate it for the
Office Addition Fund.
Patricia Mothes

---------- Page 19 ----------
The Society
or the cave. We are as close as the nearest
EVENTS
phone - a resource Mr. Mitckes failed to use.
In closing, we remain incredulous at Mr.
Dec. 10 - Southwest Region Winter Technical,
Mitckes' rebuttal of the allegations, followed
Library Annex, Carlsbad, N.M. Contact: Dave
directly by an admission - in a magazine of
or Carol Belski, 408 Southern Sky, Carlsbad,
international circulation - of violation of
NM 88220; 505-885-6168.
Georgia Statute 43-2504 (Georgia Cave Pro-
Dec. 31 - 22nd NSS Cave Diving, Safety
tection Act of 1977) by tunneling under (and
Workshop, Branford, Fla. Contact chairman
thereby breaching) a cave gate. We hope such
Joe Dabbs, 1815 Inspiration Ln., Huntsville,
criminal activity will not be tolerated.
AL 35801.
Feb. 22-26 - Friends of the Karst Meeting,
President, Florida State Cave Club
Puerto Rico. Talks, field trips, including the
Rio Camuy Cave System and the Arecibo
THANK YOU, CONVENTION PEOPLE
Observatory. Small registration fee (hotel and
Thanks for putting on such a wonderful con-
food not included). One-page abstract due Jan.
vention in 1983. Special thanks to members of
5 to Joe Troester, Dept. of Geology, Univ. of
the emergency team who located me so
Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, PR 00708.
efficiently on June 27 when it was reported that
Feb. 25 - Spring Board of Governors meeting,
my son had been injured at Seneca Rocks. Extra
Tucson, Ariz.
special thanks to Norma Peacock, who lent me
June 25-June 29 - 1984 NSS Convention,
her car to drive immediately to Grant Memorial
Sheridan, Wyo. Bob Montgomery, Chairman,
Hospital in Petersburg, W. Va. My son is O.K.
P.O. Box 2102, Casper, WY 82602; 307-
now - only minor injuries.
266-6929.
Some people I think helped are Gary Storrick
and Bernie Roche. I'm sure there are other
LETTERS
names I am not aware of.
The NEWS welcomes letters on any caving-related topic. To
be acceptable for publication, the writer's name and full
address must accompany the letter. Letters in excess of 350
words will be subject to editing.
REGIONS
THE GLORY HOLE INCIDENT
To say the least, we were keenly interested in
SERA
Mark Mitckes' letter in the June NEWS.
On June 7, Joel Buckner and David Parr
As this matter is being further investigated
found an extension to Henpeck Mill Cave in
by a Board of Governors' committee, we do
Cannon Co., Tenn. They pushed through a
not believe that the NEWS is currently the
watercrawl with three-inch airspace, crossed an
proper forum for this debate, due to the
underground drainage divide and eventually
possibility of biasing committee members with
popped out into a spacious walking passage
emotional arguments, irrelevant circumstances
with a large stream. They explored upstream
and incomplete information. We have sub-
for more than 1.5 miles through a breakdown-
mitted testimony to the BOG committee; we
free walking stream canyon without reaching
hope Mr. Mitckes has done the same.
an end. Several side leads were noted as well as
The only rebuttal we will make concerns the
a few domes. One dome complex was estimated
Florida State Cave Club's policy for showing
to be more than 100 feet high.
caves: We stand ready at any time, with
reasonable pre-notification, to lead trips for
Also, the cave is for sale. An acre of land
any group of NSS members or otherwise
with a three bedroom frame house, plus the
qualified cavers. We will lead them as far as
cave entrance, is for sale for $19,000. If
they wish to go without endangering any caver
interested call Joel Buckner at 615-668-8282.
CAVES
the GROTTO STORE
PREMIER LAMP (4" or 2.5" refl.)
UNLIMITED
TIP BRUSH, Justrite
CARBIDE LAMP PARTS KIT
JUSTRITE ELECTRIC LAMP
BATTERY CASE. 4-cell plastic
*SPECIAL! HELMET, BRKT. STRAP 10.75
SKIPPER FLASHLIGHT. C or D
CYALUME lightstick, each
RUBBER KNEEPADS. pair
Serving Cavers & Climbers
ROCKMASTER KNEEPADS, pair
At Competitive Prices
FIBREMETAL HELMET & BRACKET
CHINSTRAP for FM helmet
BRACKET L-1 only
QUICK-RELEASE GIBB, each
Catalogues Available
SPRING-LOADED GIBB, each
JUMAR ASCENDER, or R. each
CMI ASCENDER 5000, L or R. ea
4956 ASBURY CIRCLE
DUBUQUE, IOWA 52001
Phone: 319-582-7756
26519 Oak Ridge Drive, Wind Lake, WI 53185
The East Tennessee Grotto has declared
Jewett II Cave in Cumberland Co., Tenn.,
complete. The grotto has been mapping and
exploring the cave since its discovery in the
1960s. They have mapped more than 3.35 miles
of passage with 636 feet of vertical extent,
making it the third deepest cave in Tennessee.
On the final trip were Charles and Martha
Clark, Richard Wallace, Robert Rannie, Helen
Galaway and Jeff and Michele Sims. There is
Tim Glover
still one possibility the cave might continue up-
stream.
The cave name of the month goes to a recent
discovery in Jackson Co., Ala., Yurian
Dropoff, an 80-foot pit that was explored June
12 by Dave and Valerie Howell, Lin and
Debbie Guy, Kevin Barry, Stu Clifton and
Marion Smith.
Jeff Sims
CENTRAL
Surveying in Jaeger Pit, located above Lost
Valley Pit Cave in Harrison Co., Ind., has been
completed at 2,574 feet. The pit first was
descended in the late 1960s, but the original
explorers found only a 43-foot, blind pit.
In the spring of 1979 Dave Doolin and Dave
Joseph A. Divack
Black rechecked Jaeger Pit and noticed a four-
Pittsburgh, Pa.
inch crevice through which they thought they
could hear a distant waterfall. On subsequent
trips, Tom Fritsch, John Danovich and Garre
Conner enlarged this crevice to reach a
waterfall dome. In two push trips, Doolin and
Black explored the drain off this dome, digging
and crawling through nearly 500 feet of stream
passage before reaching a dry upper-level
canyon.
In another 500 feet this narrow canyon led to
a walking passage more than 1,000 feet long. In
a series of survey trips, Doolin, Black, Kent
Wilson, Karen Klein, Holly Cook and Tom
Weller surveyed the main passage.
This past spring, Mike and Robin Miessen,
Holly Cook and Dave Black located and
explored a new pit cave complex, Penny Well,
near Mauckport, Harrison Co., Ind. Following
a 50-foot entrance drop they found 23-, 33- and
20-foot drops, giving the cave a total depth of
107 feet. Off the second drop a canyon led to a
parallel 45-foot drop.
Dave Black
18.70
ROPES (150' 300' or 600')
RECHARGEABLE GELL-TYPE CELLS
1.80
P.M.I. 7/16", foot
About size, 2.5 amp-hour rated.
3.05
B.W. 2. foot
Pack of three. with charger
10.95
10.95
9/16' TUBULAR SLING, yard
.38
4.00
TUBULAR SLING. yard
.55
CAVING TEE-SHIRTS S. M. L. XL
2" SEAT-BELT SLING. yard
.55
SUPER CAVER
5.95
3.20
5/16' TENSTRON. yard
.20
BATS NEED FRIENDS
5.95
1.45
OVAL CARABINER (Liberty)
4.20
VERTICAL CAVER
5.95
5.70
LOCKING DEE 'BINER (Liberty)
5.70
15.45
RAPPEL RACK. Stainless Steel
11.90
SHIPPING & HANDLING CHARGE:
10.90
BRAKE BARS FOR RAPPEL RACK
2.00
1) Add 10% on rope and slings
2.15
CHEST BOX
15.95
2) only 6% on other items
2.30
GOSSETT BOX
27.40
3) BUT minimum of $3.00
23.75
GLOVES. leather palm. L or pr.
2.90
24.75
WHILLANS HARNESS. S. M or L
44.00
For Price List only. send S.A.S.E.
29.75
CMI EIGHT-RING DESCENDER
12.50
(Prices subject to change!)
32.00
SUUNTO COMPASS and CLINO, both 97.50
Your Suggestions Always Welcome!
Mike Houle

---------- Page 20 ----------
repel water and to keep the body warm. No
READING
mention of these garments was made in the
Reviews, Misc.
book. Perhaps synthetic clothing is not popular
Anyone may contribute items to this column simply by
in other caving areas.
forwarding same to the NEWS address.
In summary, Caving Basics lives up to its
Caving Basics. Jerry Hassemer, Caver Training
promise as a good introductory source of
Committee, Ed. National Speleological
material for beginning cavers, and its modest
Society, Cave Avenue, Huntsville, AL 35810;
price should make it affordable to most. It
1982, 125 pp, paperback $10.
should be stressed, though, that no matter how
Caving Basics is a compilation of articles by
good this book is, it cannot serve as a substitute
experienced cavers on various aspects of
for actual training and experience that can be
speleology that should prove to be extremely
gained from more experienced cavers.
useful for both novice and seasoned spelunkers
Paul Monaco, Betty Moss
alike. The book can serve as an ideal
introductory manual to caving, and as such, a
copy should be in every grotto's library, if not
in each caver's own library.
The manual covers basic equipment needs
Society Awards
for horizontal and vertical caving as well as
concepts relating to caving safety, conserva-
tion, first aid, geology and biology. There is a
By Charles Larson
brief chapter on legal aspects of caving and
Chairman, NSS Awards Committee
land owner relations and a chapter on the
The following awards were given at the 1983
structural organization of the NSS. Since each
NSS Convention:
chapter was written independently, there was
Mitchell Award: None given.
some overlap of coverage, and obvious
differences in writing style were apparent. The
Hauer Award: Larry O. Blair, 13921F.
latter should not, however, be construed as a
Larry was awarded the Peter M. Hauer
weak point in the book.
Spelean History Award for his many contribu-
Other cavers will undoubtedly have
tions to cave studies, which have included
comments about this book as well, and they
published reports on saltpeter mining in South-
should forward them to the NSS Caver Train-
eastern U.S. caves. He has a special interest in
ing Committee to be incorporated into future
documenting Civil War-era signatures found in
editions of the book.
caves associated with saltpeter works. Larry, of
Our specific comments are not intended to
Marietta, Ga., began caving in the late 1960s
be serious criticisms; rather they are just our
and has been chairman of the Dogwood City
personal observations after reading the book.
Grotto and the Southeastern Regional Associa-
The discussion on electric lights generally
tion. He has contributed significantly to
seemed too complicated for most cavers, but
organized caving in the Southeast. He also has
been a member of the American Spelean
indeed would be very useful for some electric
devotees. The information concerning bulb life
History Association, and presently is ASHA
vs. burn time on particular batteries was ex-
1st vice president.
tremely useful, and all electric cavers should be
His current projects include paleontological
aware of it.
and archeological studies in Kingston Saltpeter
Regarding additional light sources, we do
Cave, Ga., Big Bone Cave, Tenn., Lookout
not feel that chemical lights are a good choice
Mountain Cave, Tenn., and Sequoia Caverns
for a serious backup light.
in Alabama. (Janet Queisser)
In relation to helmets, too much emphasis
Stone Award: George Veni, 17322F
was placed on the price of "climbing helmets"
Dept. of Geography and
and too little emphasis placed on the much
Geology
superior protection they afford from falling
Western Kentucky University
objects.
Bowling Green, KY 42101.
Regarding clothing, many cavers in our part
George won the $1,000 Ralph Stone
of the country [East Tennessee] have found
Research Award for his thesis proposal, "The
synthetic fiber (i.e. polypropylene) under-
Interrelationship of Caves, Urban Develop-
garments to be excellent, both in their ability to
ment and Water Quality and Quantity in the
PELEOBOOKS
YOUR SPECIALIST IN
CAVE & BAT
BOOKS, PRINTS & EPHEMERA
NEW. USED & ANTIQUARIAN CATALOGS ISSUED
EMILY DAVIS MOBLEY
WILBRAHAM, MASS. 01095
P. O. BOX 333
413-596-9516
Edwards Aquifer Recharge Zone, Bexar
County, Texas." (Dave Des Marais)
Fellows: Alexander, E. Calvin, 8088FP
Bishop, Charles S., 9355F
Crawford, Nicholas C., 5008F
Day, Kenrick L., 14486FL
Ferguson, Elizabeth "Foxy," 8660FS
Harrison, Blake, 12101F
Hassemer, Jerry, 3847F
Hissong, Jack S., 16422FL
Hudson, Steve, 11444FL
Huppert, George, 7717F
Kastning, Karen, 12164FS
Lundquist, Chuck, 3251F
Maslyn, R. Mark, 10075F
Miller, Jane E., 20477F
NOW AVAILABLE
Association for Mexican
Cave Studies
Activities Newsletter
No. 13
(September 1983)
Includes:
Nita Nanta, Mexico's second
kilometer-deep cave
Deep pits in Colima
581-meter-deep cave in
Guanajuato
Diving the Huautia resurgence
Deep pits of Mexico
Purificacion and Zongolica
Calenturas and Tolantongo
80 pages, maps, photos,
now with color cover
Soft cover: $7.50
Hardbound: $10.50
Also Available:
AMCS Activities Newsletter
No. 12
$7.50
No. 11
7.00
No. 10
7.00
No. 9
7.00
No. 8
7.00
AMCS Bulletin 7,
San Juan Plateau
7.00
Publications From Mexico:
Sociedad Mexicana de
Exploraciones Subterraneas,
Boletin No. 1, 69 pages,
maps, photos
$8.00
Caverna No. 2, Asociacion
Mexicana de Espeleologia,


********** 51 pages
$2.50
All prices include postage.
SPECIAL DEAL: All of the above
publications, with soft cover
No. 13, for $50.00 postpaid.
Send check or money order to:
AMCS
P.O. Box 7672
Austin, Texas 78712
Prices good only in USA, Mexico and
Canada. Foreign orders add $1.50
per issue. Orders outside USA please
use international money in U.S. dollars.

---------- Page 21 ----------
CAVING
TRIPS
START
HERE
1983 NSS Convention, Elkins, W. Va.
NOTICE
Sign in sign out service for
caving trips is being offered by
the convention
The sign out sheets can be
picked camparound up registration the
at either the college or
or
First The to either sign Aid of tent the sheets three the places camparound be to
at
out can returned
or
the at comparound
Larry First Lilly sighing Aid tent George the Dasher handled by
or
in will be
The is phone 636-9477 number It you the First detained the Aid
in
tent are
on cave the please highway call this Rescue exiting number call
after
to prevent a cave
out
The World's
Second-Longest
Cave
SCHOOL BUS

---------- Page 22 ----------
Miller, Lynn C., 18355F
Mueller, Margaret C., 504FS
Quamen, Al, 14262F
Shaw, Dr. Trevor, 1129F
Sneed, Joel, 10137F
Soule, Gary K., 11198FL
Thornton, Jerry, 9342F
Veni, George, 17322F
Veve, Norman, 10691FL
Wallace, Richard L., 14275F
Werner, Eb, 7925F
Certificates of Merit: 1. Jointly to
Lynn C. Miller (18355F)
David R. McClurg
and Jane E. Miller (20477F)
2. Fred Grady (19586F)
Outstanding Service Award:
The first Certificate of Merit went to Lynn
David R. McClurg, 4608OS.
and Jane Miller for the outstanding job they
Dave has been a steady worker for speleo-
did in getting the cave protection bill through
logy and the NSS since he joined the Society in
the 1983 Indiana Legislature. Their work will
the late 1950s. As with many of these early
contribute to the protection of both wild and
members, much of what they have done cannot
show caves in Indiana. The efforts of a great
be remembered - as they are the ones who
many people were involved in obtaining
were at every regional and national meeting
passage of this bill, but without the dedication
doing some phase of the event that made the
and plain hard work of Lynn and Jane, it never
whole thing work.
would have happened.
Dave began by editing the California Caver
from 1960 to 1966, meanwhile serving as chair-
The second Certificate of Merit went to Fred
man of the Black Chasm Cave Preserve Com-
Grady for spearheading the effort to acquire
mittee, 1965-1981.
the Trout Rock caves for the NSS and cavers.
He was NSS administrative vice president
Fred has been a leading figure in the in-
from 1966 to 1970 and a member of the Board
vestigation of Pleistocene deposits in numerous
of Governors from 1970 to 1973. He was chair-
Appalachian caves, including Trout, New
man of the Program and Activities Committee
Trout and Hamilton - the Trout Rock caves.
from 1973 to 1975.
As chairman of the Trout Rock Conserva-
Dave was chairman of the 25th Anniversary
tion Task Force he initiated the drive to buy the
NSS Convention at Sequoia National Park in
Trout Rock property. The April issue of the
1966. Later he co-chaired the Frogtown
NEWS covered much of that success story.
National Convention in 1975. He has also
Conservation Award: Richmond Area
chaired the Vertical Section at the 1982 and
Speleological Society (third time in a row).
1983 conventions.
CLASSIFIEDS
description of sinkhole (doline) soils and
historic papers by E.A. Martel. $3.00 post-
paid. Bette White, 542 Glenn Road, State
College, PA 16801.
WANTED: Old electric trains - toy
trains. Any age - any condition. Will trade
THINKING ABOUT THE INTER-
caving gear or cash. Bob Liebman, P.O.
NATIONAL Congress in Spain 1985? I am
Box 441, Lewisburg, WV 24901.
trying to put together a list of people who
may want to get together as a charter trip.
JUST FOUND 10 copies of thesis
Today's prices are about $420; in two
entitled: "Role of Carbonate Rocks in
years who knows? Send me your name,
Modifying Extreme Flow Behavior," by
address and phone and we'll see if we can
Elizabeth L. White. $12.00 postpaid.
get something going. Joe Buontempone,
Checks must be issued on U.S. Bank.
2281 7th St., East Meadow, NY 11554.
Bette White, 542 Glenn Road, State
College, PA 16801.
SMALL BAT PATCHES (1 1/2 in. long) for
shirts to replace that alligator. Get The Bat
CAVE GEOLOGY. Published June 1983.
Zod look! Fifty cents each plus 20 cents
Edited by Will and Bette White, 30pp. A
postage. Albert Ogden, 1017 Sycamore St.,
San Marcos, TX 78666.
Attention
BUYING MINER'S LAMPS: battery,
CAVERS!!
safety, carbide, oil, candle holders. Ray
Setteur, 6917 Regency Dr., Parma, OH
Explore the newest
44129, 216-843-6649.
technology in taxidermy!
WHEN YOU ORDER FROM THE NSS
(see my terrific bowtle?)
Bookstore, you help the Society - and
You must read:
yourself! Income from the Bookstore off-
"101Uses
sets the operating expenses of the office.
Dead Bat"
It's easy - just place your order with the
NSS Bookstore, Cave Avenue, Huntsville,
The latest (and sickest) In
Alabama, or call 205-852-1300 and charge
speleo-humor by artist
it to your VISA or Master Charge card.
Rich Conley. (50 fully Illus.pgs;
Remittance must accompany the copy for classified ads. Make
send $4 to: Helderberg Area
checks payable to the National Speleological Society.
Grotto M.Nardacci, 339D
Hackett Blvd., Albany, N.Y.
Rate: Five words: one dollar (minimum fee). Additional
12206 ; allow 4-6 weeks)
words: ten cents each. Count your name and address as two
words. A five percent discount applies if you run the ad three
times, a ten percent discount for six times.
He served as advertising manager of the
NEWS from 1972 to 1976 and authored the
first detailed report and recommendations, in
1976, for the NSS Cave Ownership Committee.
He organized and coordinated six speleo-
educational seminars in five California loca-
tions and one in Portland, Ore., from 1971 to
1976. In addition he also organized the Lilburn
Speleocamp in 1972. From 1976 to present he is
primary coordinator of exploration and
mapping of Gaping Holes lava tube system in
northern California.
Dave has authored two popular books:
Amateur's Guide to Caves and Caving, 1972,
the first published book on caving techniques
in the United States, and Exploring Caves: A
Guide to the Underground Wilderness, 1978.
His work for the NSS and speleology con-
tinues, and he was the organizer of the first
Convention Short Course in Caving Tech-
niques in Bend, Ore., in 1982. (Jeanne Gurnee)
Honorary Membership: Dr. J.N. Jennings,
Canberra, Australia.
This year's recipient of Honorary Member-
ship was Dr. Joseph Newell Jennings of
Canberra, Australia. He is considered the
father of cave studies in Australia, and today
continues to work and encourage students in
speleology.
While he already was interested in speleology
in his native Yorkshire, England, it was not
until the 1950s, when he migrated to Australia,
that Dr. Jennings began concentrating on his
first interest, karst geomorphology. He has
carried out karst and speleological research in
Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea and
Malaysia as well as many parts of Europe, the
Middle East, the United States and China. He
conducted the pioneer work in Australia on the
Since 1956
the library of
American caves and caving
The Speleo Digest Series
announces the
Great Connection!
Speleo Digest 1976
Edited by Bob Ehr
462 pages
Speleo Digest 1977
Edited by Bill Mixon
430 pages
Thirteen consecutive years
in print
1967-1971
$10.00 each
1972-1979
$14.00 each
Plus $1.00 postage
NSS
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 23 ----------
The 1983 Prusik Contest
By Bill Cuddington, NSS 2177OF
The prusik contest had some exciting
WOMEN'S 30 METERS - MECHANICAL
moments this year. Attempts were made to
Age 12 and Under
break the 30-meter mechanical record. The
1. Amara Tandy
closest came within four seconds. Also, the
2. Susan Medville
attempt to break the 120-meter with three
Age 13-16
knots came within 10 seconds. This category of
1. Kim Stevener
climbing had more entrants this year overall
Age 17-19
than in the past.
1. Laura Scarberry
We wish to thank the college for the facilities
Age 20-29
and personnel who helped us in many ways.
1. Patti Mothes
Also, we thank all the people who helped us
2. Sharon Knoblach
run the contest itself. It couldn't happen
3. Paula Ledbetter
without your devotion and help.
Age 30-39
Key: W.R
World Record
1. Shari Lydy
O.W
Overall winner in this class
2. Sarah Gayle
3. Miriam Cuddington
A.G.R.
Age group record
Age 40-49
1. Elaine Hackerman
Nullarbor Plains, West Kimberley Ranges,
2. Debby Stucklen
Snowy Mountains and Chillagoe Cave District,
Age 50-59
and through his enthusiasm and scholarly
1. Avis VanSwearingen
background he has encouraged and inspired a
WOMEN'S 120 METERS - MECHANICAL
Age 20-29
1. Maureen Handler
Age 40-49
1. Elaine Hackerman
Age 50-59
1. Avis VanSwearingen
WOMEN'S THREE KNOTS 30 METERS
Age 12 and Under
1. Sherry Grove
Age 20-29
1. Cyndie Walck
Age 30-39
1. Sarah Gayle
2. Miriam Cuddington
Age 50-59
1. Avis VanSwearingen
MEN'S MECHANICAL 30 METERS
Age 12 and Under
J.N. Jennings
1. Billy Stucklen
new generation of cave scientists through the
2. Andy Belski
graduate program at Australian National Uni-
Age 13-16
versity in Canberra.
1. Watt Whittemore
Dr. Jennings has produced more than 150
Age 17-19
scientific papers, monographs and books
1. James Honaker
covering caves and geomorphology. His book,
2. Peter Southam
Karst, is considered the definitive college text
Age 20-29
on caves and karst.
1. Greg McNamara
2. Bill Bussey
0:44.8
3. Keith Barnes
0:47.2
2:03.9
4. Jim Richards
0:49.1
2:07.3
5. Kevin Bruno
0:51.0
Age 30-39
1:29.7 (A.G.R.)
1. Dick Graham
0:34.1 (A.G.R.)
2. Paul Smith
0:40.6
1:39.4
3. Marion Vittetoe
0:47.7
Age 40-49
0:49.6 (O.W)
1. Jim Charlton
0:49.6
1:45.7
2. Jim Hall
0:51.7
2:25.2
3. Bill Cuddington
0:54.1
Age 50-59
0.56.7
1. Bill Hardman
1:35.5
1:03.1
Age 60-69
1:14.8
1. Darrell Tomer
1:32.0 (A.G.R.)
MEN'S MECHANICAL - 120 METERS
2:32.3
Age 17-19
2:39.2
1. Peter Southam
6:24.6 (O.W.)
Age 20-29
1:25.1 (A.G.R.)
1. Bill Bussey
7:10.8
2. Peter Bosted
7:24.9
Age 30-39
11:19.2
1. Paul Smith
7:10.8
Age 40-49
17:50.9 (A.G.R.)
1. Bill Cuddington
6:59.8
2. Jim Hall
8:40.4
11:11.1 (A.G.R.)
3. Jim Charlton
10:22.8
(O.W.)
MEN'S THREE KNOTS 30 METERS
Age 17-19
1. Peter Southam
5:04.4
13:24.3 (A.G.R.)
Age 20-29
1. Jeff Forbes
1:37.6 (O.W.)
5:25.7
2. Trick Howard
2:02.7
3. Jim Richards
2:37.8
4:05.3 (A.G.R.) (O.W.)
Age 30-39
5:22.0
1. Paul Smith
2:25.2
2. Bruce Bannerman
4:13.4
6:12.6 (A.G.R.)
Age 50-59
1. Gene Reynolds
8:55.8 (A.G.R.)
MEN'S THREE KNOTS 120 METERS
1:18.9
Age 20-29
1:29.3
1. Trick Howard
10:14.7 (O.W.)
Age 30-39
1:54.7
1. Paul Smith
12:50.6
Age 40-49
0:44.7
1. Marion O. Smith
10:56.5 (A.G.R.)
0:53.8
0:33.3 (O.W.)
40TH
ANNIVERSARY
POSTERS
Set of three full-color posters,
beautifully reproduced at
17 by 24 inches.
$8.00
Ideal for home or fieldhouse
decoration. Or buy a bunch of them
to sell for fund-raising activities
such as the NSS Office or Save the
Caves funds.
NSS, CAVE AVENUE,
HUNTSVILLE, AL 35810

---------- Page 24 ----------
BOB & BOB
"Cavers Serving Cavers
Worldwide"
Supplier of:
Helmets
Tubular Sling
Gibbs Ascenders
Racks and brakebars
Premier Carbide Lamps
Jumars
PMI rope
BW rope
lee pads
Carbide
Carabiners
ectric lights
Books
d many other items
ite for price list to: BOB & BOB, P.O. Box 441, Lewisburg, WV 24901. Tel.: 304-772-5049
ROLL HARNESS SYSTEM
COMPLETE SIT STAND
roll harness systems are
SRT HARNESS SYSTEM
manufactured to the highest
tandards and from the best
materials. Extremely
troll
omfortable, versatile and where
ecessary fully adjustable to
MODULAR
ult all sizes of Caver. Utilize
eadily available metal
HARNESS
components.
SYSTEMS
Safety Sling.
Stirrup Ascender
to Harness
Caver's Chest Harness
Short Cow's Tail (for
Caver's Belay Belt
downward changeovers)
(also takes battery).
(Polyester)
Long Cow's Tail (for
upward changeovers)
Caver's Easy
Riser. Adjustable
Stirrup.
Caver's Leg Loops
(Polyester)
Developed in France over
many years, this method is
very well proven, and is
For use with Jumars, CMI or
strongly recommended for
Petzl ascenders.
vertical caving.
DISTRIBUTED IN NORTH AMERICA BY
SPELEOSHOPPE P.O. BOX 297-N10 FAIRDALE, KY 40118 USA
Info: 502-367-6292 - IAN ELLIS - Orders: 800-626-5877
COMPLETE SRT
ROPEWALKING
HARNESS SYSTEM
Shock Cord,
position options.
Ropewalker's Shoulder
Strap (fully adjustable).
Caver's Belay Belt
(Polyester)
Caver's Leg Loops
(Polyester).
Safety Sling
Floating Cam Foot Loop
and Adjustable Strap
Safety Straps
For use with Gibb
Ankle Foot Loop
ascenders.
