
---------- Page 1 ----------
NSS
NEWS
June 2021
American
Caving
Accidents
2019-2020

---------- Page 2 ----------
F
EATURE
533 Lumens
USB Rechard
C
ERTIFIED
UL,
R
WISDOM
NEW WISDOM INVESTMENT LIMITED
THE BRIGHTEST
HEADLAMP
FOR CAVING
New Wisdom Investment Limited
(WISDOM) is an integrated
enterprise, which focuses on being
the top brand, R&D, sales,
production and an efficient supply
chain. We specialize in producing
LED cap lamps and charging
devices. All products are of unique
design, advanced technology and
excellent quality. Most of our
product performance indexes are
in the lead position worldwide
within the cap lamp category.
WISDOM Shenzhen
1/4F, No. 9, Zhangbei Road
Longgang, Shenzhen 518116
Tel: (86) 755-28990261
Email: info@wisdom.hk
www.wisdom.hk

---------- Page 3 ----------
POSTMASTERS OR MEMBERS:
Send address changes to the National Speleological
SPELEOLOGICAL
Society Office, contact information below.
National Speleological Society Office
6001 Pulaski Pike NW, Huntsville, AL 35810
SWS
Tel: (256) 852-1300
e-mail:nss@caves.org; Web site: http://caves.org/
Please contact the office for address changes or back issues.
NSS EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
President
American Caving Accidents, 2019-2020
Geary Schindel
Bexar Grotto
San Antonio, TX
Bonny Armstrong
president@caves.org
(210).326.1576 cel
110 Timber Lakes Estates
Operations VP
Administrative VP
Heber City, Utah
Maureen Handler
Adam Weaver.
Sewanee Mountain Grotto
Paha Sapa Grotto
Sewanee, TN
Rapid City, SD
(423) 605-5569
(605) 545-5550
Review Committee:
ovp@caves.org
avp@caves.org
Andy Armstrong, Richard Breisch
Executive VP
Secretary/Treasurer
George Dasher, Yvonne Droms,
Scott Engel
Kristine Ebrey
Smoky Mountain Grotto
Sewanee Mountain Grotto
Knoxville, TN
South Pittsburg, TN
(225) 281-3914
(423)-991-3034
evp@caves.org
s-t@caves.org
Editor's Note
Bonny Armstrong
Dave Bunnell, Ph.D.
Box 879
Description of Incident Results and Types
Angels Camp, CA 95222
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics 1967-2020
Inssnews@caves.org
2019 & 2020 Incident Maps
Please include "NSS News" in your subject line when e-mailing
material to help me sort it from the spam. Thanks!
2019-2020 List of Reported Accidents and Incidents
Questions about submitting features and photos? Please see the style
2019 Caving Accidents and Incidents
and submission guidelines:on the NSS web site:
https://caves.org/pub/nssnews/style.shtml
2019 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
ADVERTISING
2019 Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Complete advertising information, including rate cards, mechanical
specs and deadlines is available online at
2020 Caving Accidents and Incidents
https://caves.org/pub/nssnews/ads.shtm
2020 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
New advertisers should contact Matt Bowers, NSS Director of
Business Development at 209-529-9000 or matt.bowers@caves.org.
2020 Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Payments for ads should be sent to the NSS office. New
advertisers are expected to pay for ads prior to publication.
Articles
DEPARTMENT EDITORS
Getting Back to Caving after COVID-or Any Long Absence from the
ASSISTANT COPY EDITOR
NEWSLETTER REVIEW
Underground
Gary Gibula
lan Reuter
garygibula@aol.com
5560 Sierra Court
Gretchen Baker
Rapid City, SD 57702
CONSERVATION
ianreuter@aol.com
"Off Rope" Means a Lot More Than Just Off Rope
Jim & Val Hildreth-Werker
CAVE CHRONICLES
PO Box 207
Andy Armstrong
Hillsboro, NM 88042-0207
Philip Rykwalder
(575) 895-5050
phillip@cavenow.com
National Coordinator of the NCRC
werks@cunacueva.com
Anmar Mirza and Gretchen Baker
SPELEAN SPOTLIGHT
Gary Gibula
A Framework for Search and Rescue Team Culture Using Mission
garygibula@aol.com
Command Philosophy
Christian Stenner
Deadline: Ads, articles, and announcements should be sent to the
editor by the 1st of the month, 1 month before the month of issue (e.g.,
Steve Hudson Award
material for the March issue needs to be in by Feb. 1).
The NSS News (ISSN 0027-7010) is published monthly with
Technology
the Members Manual and American Caving Accidents published as
additional issues by the National Speleological Society, Inc, 6001
Review of the Wisdom 4 Headlamp
Pulaski Pike NW, Huntsville, AL 35810. Periodicals Postage Paid at
Huntsville, Al and additional mailing offices. Tel: (256)852-1300, e-mail:
Jeff Cody
nss@caves.org, web: http://caves.org/
Regular membership with electronic copy of NSS News in the
NSS is $40 per year. Members may elect to receive paper copy
DEPARTMENTS
of NSS NEWS for $10 per year. Please visit members.caves.org
for descriptions of other membership categories. Non member
President's Message
Subscriptions to the NSS News are $36 per year. Individual copies
are $3.00 each or 5 or more copies for $1.00 each. Contact the
Underground Update
Huntsville office for membership applications, subscriptions, orders,
or for replacement of issues missing or damaged in the mail. Moving?
Address changes can be made from your profile in the Account
ABOUT THE COVER
Settings tab- Profile tab, for assistance call the office.
Copyright ©2021 by the National Speleological Society
Front cover: Jim Fox being attached for a vertical rescue from Heart of Gould
MIX
Cave, TN in January 2020. Photo by Rachel Saker.
Paper from
Back cover: Jim Fox in a SKED being moved through a narrow passage during
responsible sources
FSC
FSC® C013672
his rescue from Heart of Gould Cave in January 2020. Photo by Rachel Saker.
June 2021
Volume 79 Number 6
Editor
Mark Minton, Stephen Mosberg
Rene Ohms, Sarah Richards,
Christian Stenner, Forrest Wilson
aca@caves.org
Webmaster: Brian Dickey
Additional research by John Adsit, Jim
Coke, Kimberly Lughart, and Darlene
Ngyuen.
Calendar
Classified Ads

---------- Page 4 ----------
Editor's Note
Armchair caver. It's a term that you have probably
heard-maybe even used-t describe that old person in
your grotto. That "caver" who seems to have been 70 years
old for the last 70 years. The one you have never seen go
caving but has a million caving stories-stories of the good
old days when men and women climbed rope with prusik
knots, caved in blue jeans and wool sweaters, and complete-
ly ridgewalked the area that you've expressed an interest
in. Then came the global pandemic of 2020, and I, like SO
many others, suddenly became an armchair caver as well.
Concern for our health, concern for the health of oth-
ers, and in some cases local mandates have kept many of us
from engaging in our favorite activities. Caving events, in-
cluding the NSS Convention, NCRC trainings, and regional
events, were cancelled-some for two years in a row. How
could we possibly survive not caving every weekend or get-
ting together with our grotto friends once a month? When
you're a caver, it's hard to stop being a caver.
The COVID-19 pandemic has been difficult for many
of us physically, psychologically, and financially. Cavers
are a tough breed, though, and I have been encouraged to
witness many examples of caver resiliency during the last
15 months. Grottos began hosting meetings virtually, and
I was thrilled to be able attend meetings anywhere in the
country. The 2020 NSS Convention was also held virtually.
I missed seeing SO many friends in person, but I also found
it rather nice to be able to watch every presentation at a
time that was convenient for me instead of having to make
a choice between watching international exploration talks
or helping to teach at the Vertical Section workshop.
The 2020 NCRC National Seminar was cancelled, but
NCRC Board members and instructors created a webinar
series (available on the NSS YouTube channel) that intro-
duced a lot of new people to the organization and to cave
rescue topics. Other groups within the NSS used this time
to discover the benefits of meeting virtually and actually
became more productive.
The NSS has now held its first two annual live debates
for the Board of Governors' candidates. Not only has this
increased member interest and participation, but I think
it has also helped us all to make more informed election
choices and understand the NSS governing body much bet-
ter.
The year 2020 had the second lowest number of report-
ed caving accidents in more than 50 years. January and Feb-
ruary 2020 started out with the usual number and type of
accidents. Then, during the pandemic, only two incidents
(both of which involved novice cavers) required a rescue.
Of course, this is largely due to fewer people caving. The
one or two times that I went caving over the last year, our
group discussed safety protocols in advance-we kept the
ACA editor Bonny Armstrong caving in New Zealand, February 2020.
Photo by Andy Armstrong.
group small, we wore masks, and everyone maintained so-
cial distance. We also considered how our actions might put
would-be rescuers at risk. I saw enough online discussions
to know that other caving groups were practicing the same
precautions. The accident data for 2020 suggests that our
sacrifices paid off.
There are parts of 2020 that we'd all rather forget, but
let's focus on the positive: as a community, we have learned
new skills and discovered new and possibly better ways
of doing some things. Pandemic technology gave us addi-
tional ways to connect and communicate that we will likely
continue to use. In early 2021, as vaccination rates increase
and restrictions are relaxed, more of us are actively return-
ing to caving.
The future looks bright in the beam of my headlamp.
I'm ready to get out of my armchair and get back under-
ground. I hope to see you down there.
Acknowledgments: Although my name appears as edi-
tor, every issue of ACA is a collaborative effort of the ACA
Committee. I am SO grateful for this talented and dedicated
group of friends who each bring unique expertise to the
publication. If you happen to see Andy Armstrong, Rich
Breisch, George Dasher, Vonny Droms, Mark Minton, Dr.
Stephen Mosberg, Rene Ohms, Sarah Richards, Christian
Stenner, Forrest Wilson, or Brian Dickey, be sure to thank
them for their hard work.
A number of other people have contributed to this issue
including, John Adsit, Kimberly Lughart, Jim Coke, Dave
Bunnell, Darlene Ngyuen, Ray Keeler, Gretchen Baker, An-
mar Mirza, Elizabeth Rousseau, and Rachel Saker.
Finally, I hope that readers will join me in expressing
an immense amount of gratitude to the many cavers and
rescuers who shared their stories with us. May we all be
safer cavers and better rescuers because of them.
Bonny Armstrong
Heber City, Utah

---------- Page 5 ----------
Description of Incident Results and Types
American Caving Accidents (ACA) is a special publica-
tion of the National Speleological Society (NSS). Since 1967,
ACA has served as the journal of record for caving accidents
in North America. The purpose of collecting and reporting
caving accidents and incidents is to help cavers educate
themselves on the hazards of caving based on real-life in-
cidents. These incidents, when reported accurately and in
detail, should ultimately help readers become safer cavers
by learning through others' experiences.
Reports are collected through submissions by cavers in-
volved in the incident or rescue or by those who otherwise
have some credible knowledge of the event. Caving inci-
dents brought to the attention of ACA by media reports are
verified for accuracy by contacting involved parties directly
when possible.
As with previous issues, caving reports have been di-
vided into two categories: regular caving and cave diving.
These categories are further classified by incident result or
outcome, and incident type (causes and contributing fac-
tors).
Some reported incidents are placed in a separate cat-
egory called "caving-related." These include incidents in
which a person needed rescuing from a cave that they did
not intend to enter, incidents that occur on the way to or
from a cave, incidents involving animals needing rescue
from a cave, or other unusual circumstances. Because these
incidents did not occur during normal caving activities but
required caving gear, cave-rescue techniques, or cavers to
affect a rescue, they are considered caving-related. Caving-
related incidents are not included in the statistics.
Description of Incident Results
Fatalities-Fatalities from caving are relatively uncom-
mon and average about three per year. Although fatalities
tend to occur with inexperienced, ill-equipped persons, ex-
perienced cavers are not exempt.
Injury vs. No Injury-An injury is physical damage or
harm inflicted on a person, usually by an external force.
Examples include wounds, fractures, contusions, burns,
smoke inhalation, and frostbite. Heart trouble, allergic re-
actions, migraines, and other conditions are not considered
injuries and are categorized as a medical issue incident type.
Aid vs. No Aid-For the purposes of this publication,
aid is considered rendered in the following cases: if one or
more persons needed the help of others outside of those in
their caving party to exit the cave, if outside or additional
assistance was requested (even if not used), or if an ambu-
lance or Life Flight was used to transport the patient to a
medical facility.
Description of Incident Types
Acetylene-related-Acetylene-related incidents were
more common in the 1960s and 1970s than during the last
few decades. No acetylene-related incidents have been re-
ported since 1996, probably because LED lights are now fa-
vored among the majority of cavers.
Bad Air-The presence of bad air in caves can be caused
by biological decomposition, poor air exchange, carbon
monoxide from fires, blasting fumes, or chemicals being
washed into the cave.
Caver Fall-Caver falls continue to constitute a large
proportion of caving accidents. For simplicity, any fall by
any person in a cave, regardless of their experience, is con-
sidered a caver fall.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder-The category of difficulty
on rope or ladder was added to ACA in 1994 to encompass
a variety of problems that may prevent a caver from being
able to ascend or descend a rope or ladder.
Drowning-Drowning is often listed as the cause of
cave diving fatalities since the triggering event is often dif-
ficult to identify. In non-scuba incidents, drowning may OC-
cur from attempting to freedive into an underwater cave,
swimming in underground lakes or rivers, or being swept
away by water.
Equipment Problem-This catch-all category includes
problems such as rigging, light, and rope failures; and mis-
use or lack of equipment.
Exhaustion-Exhaustion is likely a contributing factor
to many caving accidents and is probably underrepresent-
ed in caving accident statistics.
Flooding-Unexpected, rising water can lead to long-
term entrapment underground, hypothermia, and possibly
drowning. A good understanding of cave hydrology and
the local weather forecast are necessary skills for safe cav-
ing.
Hypothermia-Hypothermia is often a secondary result
in caving incidents resulting from a caver being stuck, in-
jured, or stranded in a cave. Hypothermia is especially dan-
gerous not only because of the physiological aspects, but
because it impairs judgment, which can lead to mistakes
and other accidents.
Medical Issue-Some incidents that occur underground
cannot be contributed directly to the caving activity. Chron-
ic or acute medical conditions may present suddenly such
as cardiovascular events, migraines, allergic reactions, etc.
Lost-Getting lost underground can happen to experi-
enced and beginning cavers. Strategies to avoid becoming
lost include: go with someone who knows the cave, take a
cave map (and know how to read it), and pay attention to
landmarks. Always let someone know where you are going
and when to expect your return. If you are overdue, a res-
cue can be quickly organized.
Lost Control on Rappel-This incident-type category
was added in 2011 to cover incidents of persons losing
control while on rappel. In previous issues, these incidents
were listed under Caver Falls or Difficulty on Rope. While
most out-of-control rappels also result in a caver fall, the
contributing factor or cause is very different than those typ-
ical for caver falls.
Rockfall-Shifting or falling rocks, either from natural
causes or human disturbance, can result in entrapment,
injury, or even death. Pay extra attention near the top and
bottom of pits.

---------- Page 6 ----------
Stuck-Stuck refers to the physical
entrapment of a person which prevents
them from moving from their position.
Being stuck is a serious situation as it can
lead to hypothermia and possibly crush
syndrome.
Trapped or Stranded-This category
describes any incident in which the caver
or cavers are prevented from exiting the
cave.
Other-This catch-all category in-
cludes incidents that don't quite fit in oth-
er categories. Examples include twisting
an ankle or pulling a muscle during nor-
mal caving movement, missing a callout
time, surface objects falling into a pit, van-
dalism of rigged entrance ropes, and en-
trapment of a finger between two objects.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Hawai'i
2019 Cave Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
Larger dots = multiple incidents
N
1,000
Miles
2020 Cave Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
Larger dots = multiple incidents
N
1,000
Miles

---------- Page 8 ----------
2019 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
February 24
Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
March 21
unspecified cave
Belize
March 24
McAlisterville Cave
Pennsylvania
April 27
Cyclops Cave
Virginia
May 26
Peppersauce Cave
Arizona
June 2
Thunder Canyon Cave
California
June 5
Locomotive Breath Cave
Virginia
June 19
Blue Spring Cave
Tennessee
June 20
Big Room Cave
Tennessee
June 23
Mothra Cave
Washington
June 27
Plutos Cave
California
July 6
Stephens Gap Cave
Alabama
July 13
Lava River Cave
Arizona
July 21
Coronado Cave
Arizona
September 5
Hughes Cave
Alabama
September 7
unspecified cave
Utah
September 21
Toothbrush Cave
Utah
September 22
Mine Shaft Cave
Missouri
September 28
Salamander Cave
Arizona
October 6
Valhalla Cave
Alabama
October 23
Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
November 23
Valhalla Cave
Alabama
November 25
Bisaro Anima
British Columbia, Canada
November 30
Bisaro Anima
British Columbia, Canada
2019 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
February 9
El Dudu Cave System
Dominican Republic
April 16
Mill Pond Cave
Tennessee
November 24
Manatee Springs
Florida
2019 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
April 12
Stephens Gap Cave
Alabama
June 1
unspecified cave
Florida
August 19
unnamed sinkhole
Kentucky
September 6
unspecified sea cave
California
September 9
Cueva de la Puente
San Luis Potosí, Mexico
November 4
unnamed lava tube
Hawai'i
November 7
Capshaw Cave
Tennessee
November 9
unnamed sinkhole
Kentucky
Result
Incident Type
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
no injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded/hypothermia
injury and aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
medical issue
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded
fatality
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
other
aid, no injury
lost
no injury, no aid
rockfall
injury and aid
rockfall
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
no injury, no aid
other
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
fatality
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
other
Result
Incident Type


********** 2 fatalities
drowning
aid, no injury
stranded
fatality
drowning
Result
Incident Type
fatality
caver fall
aid, no injury
dog rescued from pit
aid, no injury
calf rescued from sinkhole
aid, no injury
boaters stuck in sea cave
injury, aid
caver fall
fatality
fell into cave
aid, no injury
car drove into cave entrance
aid, no injury
calf rescued from sinkhole

---------- Page 9 ----------
2020 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 17
Heart of Gould Cave
Tennessee
January 25
Weybridge Cave
Vermont
February 1
Indian Grave Point Cave
Tennessee
February 9
Whitings Neck Cave
West Virginia
March 20
Castleguard Cave
Alberta, Canada
May 11
Lost River Cave
Kentucky
May 23
Scroll Cave
Arizona
May 30
Valhalla Cave
Alabama
August 13
Bearcat Caves
British Columbia, Canada
September 13
Snail Shell Cave
Tennessee
September 15
Over the Hill Cave
British Columbia, Canada
October 17
Nielsons Cave
Utah
2020 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
July 8
Hole-In-The-Wall
Florida
2020 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 28
unnamed sinkhole
Illinois
February 23
Buzzmans Cave
Indiana
May 7
unspecified sea cave
California
July 11
ridgewalking
Pennsylvania
August 25
Sharps Cave
West Virginia
Please report all accidents, incidents, and near-misses from any year to
aca@caves.org
Result
Incident Type
injury and aid
rockfall
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stuck
injury, no aid
caver fall
fatality
drowning
aid, no injury
lost/stranded
injury and aid
lost control on rappel
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
flooding
no injury, no aid
rockfall
injury, no aid
caver fall
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
pet duck fell into sinkhole
aid, no injury
dog stranded in cave
aid, no injury
trapped in sea cave
aid, no injury
exhaustion
no aid, no injury
lost car keys

---------- Page 10 ----------
2019 Caving Accidents and Incidents


********** 24 February 2019
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
After spending a few hours in Tumbling Rock Cave, a
female caver in her early 30s began descending a rope at
the top of the Inner Sanctum room. Ten feet from the top is
a rebelay. The caver expressed concern to the group about
crossing the rebelay. She had crossed rebelays before but
had not practiced them recently. Experienced cavers in the
group decided to descend last SO that they would be there
to coach her through the process.
The caver rappelled down the top section of rope,
clipped her short cowstail into the anchor, derigged her
rack, and then rerigged her rack below the anchor into the
bottom rope. The caver then found that she was unable to
stand up in the rebelay loop and therefore could not un-
weight and unclip her short cowstail. Although she was
wearing ascending gear, she was also unable to use an as-
cender and footloop to unweight her cowstail.
The experienced cavers at the top of the pitch uncoiled
an additional 40-foot rope, threaded it through one of the
topside anchors, and tied a figure-eight on a bight to the
end of the rope. They clipped a carabiner to the loop and
lowered the rope down to the stranded caver. Following the
instructions of the more experienced cavers, she clipped the
carabiner to the central maillon of her harness. Three cavers
hauled her up high enough to unclip her short cowstail. She
then rappelled to the bottom without further incident.
In his report, Garreau suggests that although the caver
had crossed rebelays before, a lack of practice, mud on the
caver and the rope, and fatigue may have been factors in the
caver being unable to stand in the rebelay loop.
1. Dane R. Garreau, Incident Report, 18 December 2019.
Comments: Inexperience on rope often leads to this
and similar types of incidents. Cavers wearing a complete
vertical system should have the ability to move up or down
a rope at any time, through the use of changeovers. It is
unclear why the caver in this incident was unable to use her
gear to move upward without assistance; perhaps it was
due to exhaustion or to her unfamiliarity with problem-
solving techniques for rebelays.
In addition, when using Frog or Texas Systems (that
employ upper ascenders attached to the foot by a footloop),
cavers should consider attaching the footloop to the system
with a small, non-locking carabiner. This allows the foot-
loop to be easily detached from the SRT (single rope tech-
nique) system and attached to any other anchor, including
a rebelay, sometimes providing a crucial step up in time
of need. A movable footloop is also an advantage in other
situations such as pickoffs, crossing lips, and any situation
where a short etrier would aid in transferring weight.
This team had the resources and critical thinking skills
to devise a simple, effective system for solving the problem,
talking the stranded caver through the necessary steps.
Cavers in Belize practice with a Ronin Lift ascender. Photo by Daniel
Veelik.


********** 21 March 2019
unspecified cave, Belize
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
A group of four cavers was exiting a cave in Belize af-
ter a day of surveying and trying to lower water levels in a
nearly sumped passageway. The exit consists of eight pitch-
es totaling approximately 300 feet. The top three pitches are
150 vertical feet combined and are rigged with rebelays.
These top three pitches are nicknamed the Elevator Shaft
due to the pit's relatively open nature. In 2019, a rigging
team had also rigged the Elevator Shaft with a 300-foot
dedicated rope to be used with a Ronin Lift Ascender, an
electric ascending device, to aid tired cavers and/or heavy
loads. The extra rope was left at the top, and tied off with a
super Munter hitch (a version of the Munter hitch appropri-
ate for heavy loads).
The last caver up the pit chose to use the Ronin Lift to
exit. He had previously practiced with it on the surface. The
Ronin Lift rope appeared muddy; apparently someone had
accidentally climbed it. As the machine ascended, it slipped
occasionally on the mud, SO the caver removed mud off of
the rope ahead of it with a cloth. This cloth got pulled into
the Ronin Lift, and he could not ascend or changeover to
descend and was hanging in free space, stuck on rope.
Fortunately, because the rope with the Ronin Lift was
rigged with a super Munter hitch, the stuck caver was eas-
ily lowered to a ledge where he was able to regain circula-
tion and drink some water. The cloth was extracted from
the Ronin Lift and it became functional again. The last caver
ascended the second time without problem, although he
noted that being stranded on rope had left him feeling ex-
hausted.
1. Gretchen Baker, Incident Report, 3 January 2021.
Comments: The user's perceived safety margin of a de-
vice, SRT system, or rescue system is often based on limited

---------- Page 11 ----------
data collected under a certain set of conditions. Safety must
be reassessed when real-world conditions and/or modes of
operation change. In this case, an unforeseen event (some-
one muddying the rope) caused the change in conditions.
The change of conditions brought on an ad-hoc solution
(the cloth) that seemed effective but had a critical failure
mode.
The Ronin Lift was brought into the cave as a safety de-
vice, and it was first tested by the team above ground. The
instructions advised not to put anything in front of it, but at
the time it made sense to try to remove some of the exces-
sive mud. Rigging the rope ahead of time with contingency
rigging helped to make this a relatively quick rescue.


********** 24 March 2019
McAlisterville Cave, Pennsylvania
caver fall, no injury, no aid
A group of experienced and novice cavers were on a
Sunday trip to McAlisterville Cave. The group reached a
steep climbdown, where the trip leader descended first to
help the others. Alec Matheus (20) started down next. He sat
on the edge of a ledge and placed his feet out and against
the ceiling of the room that they were climbing down into.
As he started to work his way down, his feet unexpectedly
slipped, and he started to fall headfirst. The trip leader, who
had experience in the cave and was aware that others in the
group might have trouble with the climbdown, was posi-
tioned to assist and was able to catch Matheus, preventing
any injury. The other two novice cavers decided not to con-
tinue down into this section of the cave.
1. Alec Matheus, Incident Report, 24 February 2021.
Comments: Matheus said that a lack of experience led
to this incident and that the group probably should have
used a handline.


********** 27 April 2019
Cyclops Cave, Virginia
stranded/hypothermia, aid, no injury
On a Friday evening, six men, Andrew Webb (22), Mark
Webb (55), Anthony Webb (34), David Gobble (55), Jason
McFaddin (54), and Jeff Jackson (55), entered Cyclops Cave
with the intention of camping overnight and exiting the
cave on Saturday night. Cyclops Cave is a challenging, tech-
nical, multi-drop cave, and this group was unprepared and
lacked proper equipment; they had one harness and one
helmet among them. Andrew Webb had been to the cave
before and served as the trip leader. He planned to use a
bosun's chair (also called a boatswain's chair) and a block-
and-tackle system to haul the group up several pitches to
exit the cave. This system had worked well for him in this
cave on previous trips. However, a week of rain had made
conditions in the cave "terrible," he said, and the ropes
were muddy and difficult to use. Additional rain Saturday
night caused conditions in the cave to further deteriorate.
When the group tried to exit the cave, the ropes and
pulley systems failed in the muddy conditions. As members
of the team began to succumb to hypothermia and exhaus-
tion, Andrew Webb decided that he would free-climb to the
surface. In what he described as a "do or die" effort, he as-
cended hand-over-hand up muddy rope pitches to the sur-
face, where he called 911 at 2:15 a.m. on Sunday. Cleveland
Fire Department was the initial responding agency. The re-
sponders were able to make patient contact; they promptly
requested additional resources from Virginia Department
of Emergency Management (VDEM). The Eastern Region
of the NCRC assisted in deploying trained resources to the
scene.
Billy Chrimes of VDEM led a multi-organization rescue
response that called upon resources from Blacksburg Vol-
unteer Rescue Service (BVRS), Cyclops Cave Project cavers,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI) cavers, Chattanooga-
Hamilton County (Tennessee) Rescue Service Cave-Cliff
Team, and NSS cavers from the Spring VAR event that was
in progress concurrently.
Based on information from the initial responders, the
BVRS team determined that the group was likely stranded
at the bottom of Turtle Drop, a complex 40-foot pit with a
steeply sloping pitch at the top to a rebelay, below which
is a vertical drop to the bottom. The rope is kept free from
protrusions by two redirects. Between Turtle Drop and the
surface are three additional pitches: a 22-foot mostly free
drop in a fissure, a tight 12-foot fissure, and a 13-foot en-
trance drop. The top two pitches can be navigated without
rope by a fresh and experienced climber, but since vertical
gear is needed for the other drops, cavers typically use SRT
for the first two drops as well.
The rescuers were divided into three task forces, each
charged with rigging one section of the vertical obstacles.
The initial response/rigging team transported food, warm
clothes, and hot chocolate to the cold, stranded cavers. They
also brought in five harnesses and helmets to better equip
the cavers for the trip out of the cave. The stranded cavers
were grateful for the hot chocolate. An initial medical as-
sessment revealed three patients in mild hypothermia and
two patients in moderate hypothermia. Their symptoms
ranged from tired to exhausted with slightly altered mental
status. The patients were readied in harnesses, and rescuers
determined no immediate need for a litter.
The cavers were hauled up the pitches using a combi-
nation of traditional haul systems and small-party rescue-
type methods, including a rappelling counterweight. Res-
cuers found it necessary to install additional bolt anchors
and eventually to modify the cave passage to better evacu-
ate an exhausted patient. Evacuation of the first caver to the
surface took three hours. The remaining cavers were moved
much more quickly once the route and haul systems were
established. As it became apparent that the rescue was pro-
gressing more quickly than expected, the responding Chat-
tanooga team was asked to stand down, and they turned
around near the Virginia border.
By 6:00 p.m. Sunday, all five men had been rescued
from the cave. Andrew Webb said he'd definitely go back
into the cave but planned to take a class with his brother
first before doing SO. He told ABC News that his father and
uncle, who were diagnosed with pneumonia, were still
under observation in the hospital. The other men, he said,

---------- Page 12 ----------
were sore but doing OK and glad to be out of the cave.
1. Enjoli Francis and Stephanie Ramos, "Man who climbed out of
cave with his bare hands to get help for relatives stuck inside: 'It
was either do or die," www.abcnews.go.com, 29 April 2019.
2. Brian Pascus and Peter Martinez, "Virginia cave rescue: 5 men
freed from Cyclops Cave in southwest Virginia," www.cbsnews.
com, 28 April 2019.
3. Wil Orndorff, "Cave Rescue at Cyclops Cave, Russell County,
Virginia," Incident Report, 21 January 2021.
Comments: The caving group was unprepared and ill-
equipped for a technical vertical cave. Gear and techniques
(use of the bosun's chair) that had worked for other people,
under different conditions, were inadequate after the cave
had been subjected to heavy rain infiltration. Thankfully,
the group had family members that were on alert to call for
rescue.
Rescuers report that the success of this operation is due
to three factors:
1. Common and frequent cave rescue training by re-
sponders in the region, primarily through National Cave
Rescue Commission (NCRC) courses.
2. A well-stocked gear cache with enough resources to
rig and operate four haul systems at once.
3. Coordination between state emergency managers
and rescue teams, instead of individual resources, which
increased efficiency and the comfort level of the authorities.
BVRS in particular had 17 rescuers underground, with even
more team members on site.
An injured woman is lowered from the entrance of Peppersauce
Cave. Photo by C. Carothers.


********** 26 May 2019
Peppersauce Cave, Arizona
caver fall, injury and aid
A mother (55) and daughter (26) took a recreational trip
to the very popular Peppersauce Cave. They had visited
show caves in the past, but this would be their first time
exploring a cave on their own. Both women wore tennis
shoes and bicycle helmets with two lights strapped to each
helmet.
Mother and daughter were in the Main Lake Room, 700
feet from the entrance, when the mother slipped in the mud
at the bottom of the ladder. She fell and fractured her right
tibia, just below the knee. Realizing that this was a serious
injury, the pair started slowly making their way out of the
cave. The mother was able to climb the ladder slowly, tak-
ing one step at a time. At the top, she slid on her hip to
the Big Room, dragging her leg behind her. Eventually, the
daughter left to go get help. She wrapped her mother in a
space blanket before departing.
In the Main Corridor, the daughter encountered cavers
Ray Keeler, Blase LaSala, and others performing a LiDAR
scan. She asked for help then left the cave to call 911. There
was no cellular signal at the cave, SO she had to drive until
she could place a call.
The cavers performed an initial medical assessment
and determined that by splinting the leg, they could start
an evacuation with the mother's assistance. Keeler used his
Crawldaddies knee pads as the splint, placing one on the
front of the leg and one on the side to provide vertical sta-
bility. Keeler and LaSala acted as moving human crutches,
helping the woman move forward and letting her sit and
slide on her bottom when possible.
Responders from the Oracle Fire Department and the
Pinal County Sheriff's Office arrived as the rescuers and pa-
tient were a short distance from the entrance. The woman
was packaged in a litter and carried down to the parking
area. Her daughter drove her to an emergency room.
Keeler followed up with the daughter a few days later
via e-mail. The daughter responded, "My mom is in good
spirits here at home, resting on the couch with a knee im-
mobilizer and the dog keeping close watch on her. The ER
told us she has a tibial plateau fracture, and they were ex-
tremely grateful that you had loaned her your kneepads!
They said that those kneepads prevented further damage to
her knee during the rescue! Thank you again for all of your
amazing assistance. We feel SO lucky that we happened to
be in the cave at the same time as you. I don't know what
we would have done without you."
1. Ray Keeler, Incident Report, 29 May 2019.
Comments: The most common injuries to cavers are to
the extremities, and most patients with injuries to one or
two extremities can be assisted out of the cave, using some
amount of their own power to evacuate. The most impor-
tant factors to consider in a rescue are what is best for the
patient's medical condition, and the condition and abilities
of the team. Both of these factors must be frequently reas-
sessed throughout the rescue. The laser-scanning team that

---------- Page 13 ----------
the daughter happened upon was familiar with the cave
and had been trained in several cave rescue courses, pro-
viding confidence to all that the evacuation would be pos-
sible. Because of the daughter's 911 call, the rescue team
also knew that more help was on the way. This knowledge
can also boost morale and keep momentum moving toward
the cave entrance.


********** 2 June 2019
Thunder Canyon Cave, California
caver fall, injury, no aid
While caving in Thunder Canyon Cave, a male caver
(39) was negotiating a difficult climbdown when he slipped
and fell. Although he fell only about 3 feet, an impact with
a rock projection caused injury to his left shin.
The caver and his companion exited the cave and ad-
ministered first aid to control the bleeding. The companion
carried the injured caver's pack on the steep and lengthy
hike back to their vehicle.
1. David Angel, Incident Report, 22 July 2019.
Comments: The caver said he didn't notice a much eas-
ier route under the obstacle and believed that he must have
previously negotiated this downclimb. This led to overcon-
fidence on a slippery climb. This incident highlights the im-
portance of carrying basic first aid and splinting material
when caving.


********** 5 June 2019
Locomotive Breath Cave, Virginia
stranded/hypothermia, aid, no injury
Two men entered Locomotive Breath Cave on Satur-
day, 1 June 2019. They parked their rented truck at a local
diner. The men were not experienced cavers, but said, "We
wanted to really dive in and do the hard stuff." An hour
into their adventure, their first flashlight died. They contin-
ued on, and soon they realized that they were lost. As their
other lights died one by one, they decided to split up to look
for the way out.
When one of the men did not show up for work on
Monday, family members became concerned. The rental
truck was eventually located using its OnStar® system.
Friends suggested they may have gone caving although an
initial search of Locomotive Breath Cave did not locate the
men and search efforts were concentrated elsewhere.
Eventually, more resources were brought in, including
rescuers with caving experience, and the men were quickly
located in the cave. After four days in the cave, both men
were hypothermic to the point that they had stopped shiv-
ering. They were given food and water, wrapped in warm-
ing blankets, and assisted out of the cave once they started
shivering and were able to move. One of the men collapsed
only 100 feet from the entrance and had to be carried the
rest of the way out of the cave in a litter. Both men made a
full recovery.
1. Eddie Callahan, "Update: Two males trapped in Low Moor
cave rescued, in stable condition," www.wdbj7.com, 5 June 2019.
2. Eric Miller, "After four days trapped in a cave, Covington man
thankful for the family that never lost hope," www.wdbj7.com, 8
June 2019.
3. Glen Hugus, Incident Report, 9 January 2020.
Comments: Even basic caving requires some amount of
preparation and specialized gear and clothing. These men
sought neither proper caving training nor permission of the
landowner.


********** 19 June 2019
Blue Spring Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, no aid
On the third day of the 2019 National Speleological So-
ciety (NSS) Convention in Cookeville, Tennessee, a group
of cavers went to Blue Spring Cave in White County, Ten-
nessee. During the trip, a male caver (77) fell and injured his
left side and back. An incident report was not submitted,
but the resulting injury played a part in another incident
the following day.
1. Alan Hatcher, e-mail communication, 12 December 2019.


********** 20 June 2019
Big Room Cave, Tennessee
medical issue, injury, no aid
On the fourth day of the 2019 NSS Convention in
Cookeville, Tennessee, a group of 14 cavers went to Big
Room Cave. One caver (77) had fallen during a cave trip the
day before and was experiencing some discomfort, but he
continued with his plan to participate.
The group made it to the back of the Big Room in the
cave. From there, 12 members of the group proceeded
through Tombstone Pass, which involves crawling and
negotiating tight passages. Alan Hatcher and Scott Hurley
informed the trip leaders that they would stay behind and
wait in the Big Room.
A half-hour later, Hurley traveled a short distance
down the Tombstone Pass. Hurley soon met the 77-year-old
caver returning alone and showing obvious signs of pain.
Stooping or crawling greatly exacerbated the pain, but the
caver thought that he could continue out of the cave if he
went slowly. Hatcher accompanied the injured caver to-
ward the exit while Hurley went to inform the trip leaders
of their plans.
Traveling out of the cave, Hatcher helped the older cav-
er with one climb; although his injury was becoming more
painful, he required no further assistance to exit. At the
surface, a caver with medical training assessed the injured
caver and, seeing a large, painful bruise on his torso, rec-
ommended a trip to a medical clinic for x-rays. The x-rays
revealed a fractured rib.
1. Alan Hatcher, Incident Report, 12 December 2019.
Comments: Cavers should exercise extra caution when
caving with pre-existing injuries. Being in another state in a
convention atmosphere with the opportunity to visit many
amazing caves likely influenced the injured caver's deci-

---------- Page 14 ----------
sion to go caving again soon after his accident. Many rib
injuries do not hurt immediately and may take up to a day
or SO to become sore and stiff. Cavers should realistically
evaluate their condition before a trip to prevent issues aris-
ing deep inside a cave, thus increasing risk for themselves,
their teammates, and potential rescuers.


********** 23 June 2019
Mothra Cave, Washington
caver fall, injury, no aid
Three cavers were shuttling scientific equipment down
a boulder-strewn slope into a glacier cave. The equipment
was packed in large Pelican cases, and the cavers were
spread out down the slope, methodically passing the cases
down the slope to the next person, and then advancing to
the front of the line to continue. At one point, Mark Dickey
(37) had just handed off the last case and was maneuvering
around the other two cavers to advance to the front of the
line. As he began to pass, he felt the rocks below him start
to shift. He stopped moving and told the others to traverse
sideways across the slope. Once they were clear, Dickey
also tried to move across the slope, but a substantial section
of the boulder field below and around him began moving
downhill. The shifting rocks caused him to lose his footing
and roll a short distance, but he managed to land on his feet.
One very large boulder, the size of a small car, narrowly
missed hitting him.
Dickey exited the cave to recover for a few hours but
was then able to resume normal activities. He reports that
he was sore and bruised the next day but otherwise unhurt.
1. Mark Dickey and Jessica Van Ord, e-mail communication, 27
January 2021.
Comments: Boulder and breakdown slopes can be
unstable, especially in virgin or infrequently traveled pas-
sages. Best practices such as staying close together SO that
moving rocks cannot pick up momentum between team
members and maintaining clear communication can help to
reduce risk on unstable slopes.


********** 27 June 2019
Plutos Cave, California
stranded, aid, no injury
A group of four young adults entered Plutos Cave at
5:30 p.m. for the purpose of "meditation and spiritual en-
richment." The cave is a 2,000-foot-long lava tube that is
popular with the public. The group reached the end of the
main passage without incident and meditated together for
about two hours. At that time, one member of the group
crawled down an extension of the passage to meditate on
his own. When he did not return, his friends became wor-
ried and exited the cave to call 911.
Cavers responded to a Siskiyou County Search and
Rescue callout and located the missing caver around mid-
night 100 feet down the crawlway. The man's single light
source had failed during his solo meditation SO he waited
for several hours in the dark until help arrived. Rescuers de-
termined he was uninjured, and after taking in some food
and water, he was able to follow his rescuers out of the cave.
1. William Broeckel, Incident Report, 16 December 2019.
Comments: The National Speleological Society (NSS)
recommends three sources of light per caver, regardless of
the purpose or planned duration of the trip. Organizations
planning group activities should invest the time and money
to ensure that their participants are safely equipped for the
activity.
Large passage in Plutos Cave, a lava tube in California. Photo by
Dave Bunnell.


********** 6 July 2019
Stephens Gap Cave, Alabama
fatality, caver fall
A 20-year-old soldier from the 101st Airborne Division
died in a rappelling accident at Stephens Gap Cave. The
man and a friend were on vacation when they decided to
visit the cave. The friend rappelled twice. As the soldier
rappelled, his friend claimed to have seen him "twisting
around the rope," just before hearing a "pop." The soldier
then fell the remaining 60 feet to his death. Inspection of the
victim's gear revealed that his rappel device had been con-
nected to his harness by two chained carabiners. The rappel
device was still attached to the rope with one carabiner; the
other carabiner was still attached to his harness.
1. Nolan Crane, "20-year-old dies rappelling at Jackson County
cave," www.waff.com, 8 July 2019.
2. Kyle Rempfer, "101st Airborne soldier dies in off-duty rappel-
ling accident," www.armytimes.com, 9 July 2019.
3. Kimberly Lughart, e-mail communication, 21 February 2021.

---------- Page 15 ----------
Comments: Based on the two-carabiner connection to
the descent device and the audible "pop" at the moment
of detachment, this appears to be what is called a "rollout"
hardware failure. Rollout can occur when two or more
pieces of hardware (like a carabiner and a descender) are
chained together. Rotation of one or more pieces of hard-
ware during a moment of unloading causes improper cross-
loading, resulting in torque forces that can open or even
break a carabiner gate once the system is loaded again. The
victim was using a European canyoneering-style rappel de-
vice described as "similar to a Pirana." It was found on the
rope at the point of detachment.
Canyoneers commonly extend their rappel devices
away from their harnesses, often with a soft "dog bone,"
like the webbing seen between two carabiners in a rock
climbing quickdraw. This rappel extension is used to create
a lower center of gravity relative to the descending device
while rappelling, thus reducing the likelihood of inverting.
It also aids in rappelling through narrow slots. In this inci-


********** dent, there are several unknowns: Why did the victim ex-
tend his descender with two carabiners? Did he begin the
rappel from the top with the carabiners cross-loaded, or did
they become that way after stopping at a ledge or other ob-
stacle on the way down, where the descending system may
have been momentarily unloaded before continuing?
Lava River Cave passage, has several sections floored with loose
breakdown. Photo by Dave Bunnell.


********** 13 July 2019
Lava River Cave, Arizona
caver fall, injury and aid
A 43-year-old Phoenix, Arizona, woman was rescued
from Lava River Cave. She reportedly was wearing inap-
propriate footwear and slipped and fell, injuring her hip
approximately 500 feet into the cave. The Coconino County
Sheriff's Search and Rescue team responded and found that
the woman could not walk out on her own. They carried
her out of the cave in a litter, and she was transported to
Flagstaff Medical Center.
1. Eric Zott, "Injured woman rescued from Lava Caves near Flag-
staff," www.azfamily.com, 13 July 2019.
2. Paul Clifton, "Lava River Cave Rescue," www.prescottnews.
com, 20 July 2019.
Comments: Lava River Cave is a popular destination
that is easily found by the general public following road
signs and information on the internet. Despite cautionary
information at the entrance, underprepared visitors with no
helmets and improper footwear are often encountered in
the cave.


********** 21 July 2019
Coronado Cave, Arizona
other (unknown), injury and aid
The Cochise County Technical Response Team was
notified of an injured woman (35) with a possible broken
ankle in Coronado Cave. When rescue teams arrived, the
reporting party said that the woman was out of the cave but
would need to be carried the half mile to the trailhead. As
the rescue teams collected their gear, the woman arrived in
the parking lot, riding piggy-back on her husband's back.
The patient's family transported her to the hospital.
1. Sarah Truebe, Incident Report, 6 August 2019.
Comments: It is not known what caused this accident
or where in the cave the accident occurred. Coronado Cave
is a popular, undeveloped cave for cavers and the general
public.


********** 5 September 2019
Hughes Cave, Alabama
lost, aid, no injury
Three people trespassed on private property and en-
tered Hughes Cave at 3:30 a.m. A woman in the group
reportedly began having a panic attack and was accompa-
nied out of the cave by one companion at 6:00 a.m. Four
hours later, the third person had not emerged, SO his friends
called 911. Rescue teams found the man after a few hours of
searching the multilevel cave. He was lost but not injured.
1. WHNT News 19, "Missing man found in Morgan County
cave," www.whnt.com, 5 September 2019.
2. Kelly Kennedy, "Man rescued from cave in Union Grove,"
www.rocketcitynow.com 6 September 2019.
Comments: Trespassing, especially when it results in a
rescue, jeopardizes access for everyone. Also, cave trips that
begin at 3:30 a.m. probably have more statistical chance for
a mishap.


********** 7 September 2019
unspecified cave, Utah
rockfall, no injury, no aid
On September 2019, a group of six cavers was conduct-
ing scientific research at a cave in northeastern Utah. The
cave has a small funnel-like sinkhole entrance that slopes
downhill to the top of a narrow, vertical pit in bedrock, ap-
proximately 40 to 45 feet deep. The team's rope was rigged
to a nearby tree. From the tree, the rope angled across the
sinkhole and down into the sloping entrance. The rope then
turned a sharp corner across the bedrock lip of the pit. A
rope pad was placed and secured over the bedrock corner

---------- Page 16 ----------
to help protect the rope from abrading on the sharp bend
at the lip of the pit. To minimize the amount of debris that
rope movement might send down the pit, the rope was also
routed over a small log in the sinkhole. That positioning
kept the loaded rope from touching the ground anywhere
between the anchor tree and the padded bedrock corner at
the top of the pit. The entrance area was also briefly cleared
of small debris.
After finishing their planned research activities, the
group started to exit the cave. The first three cavers climbed
the pit and exited the cave with no issue other than the dif-
ficulties expected in a narrow slot with a sharp corner at the
top of the rope drop. The fourth caver started up the rope but
became concerned when he noticed small amounts of dirt
falling down the pit with almost every sit-stand movement
up the rope. Continuing up the rope slowly and carefully,
trying to minimize the movement of the rope, and trying
not to breathe the organic soil that kept raining down, the
caver ascended to a point about 6 feet below the lip of the
pit. From there, he was able to look up to examine the few
remaining feet of the climb and discovered that the "bed-
rock lip" had broken free from the cave wall; it was now
This rock unexpectedly broke free from the wall
while a caver was on rope. Photo by Eric Richards.
just a large rock rolling into and out of the pit with every
movement of the rope. The group feared that the weighted
rope was actually holding the rock in place against the wall
at the top of the pit and that unweighting or moving the
rope would allow the rock to fall.
Concerned that the loose rock could not be passed safe-
ly, and with very little room for the caver to duck out of
the way to let the rock fall past him, the group decided that
the caver should switch to descending gear, and then climb
down to a wider and safer location in the pit. From that
safer location, the rope could be unweighted, and the rock
could either be moved or allowed to fall safely. However,
while the caver was switching from ascending to descend-
ing gear, the rope was partially unweighted for a moment,
and the overhead rock immediately rolled out from behind
the rope and fell down the pit. The caver felt the rope shift
and suddenly drop a few inches, and he quickly pushed
himself sideways out of the most likely rockfall path. The
rock hit the wall above and below the caver, but missed
damaging either the caver or the rope.
After spitting out a mouthful of dirt and declaring him-
self unharmed, the caver let the dust settle a bit and then
finished climbing up and out of the cave. After climbing
out, the top of the pit was re-examined and again cleared
of loose debris. The fallen rock was found to be a rectangu-
lar block, weighing perhaps 25 to 30 pounds, that had been
pulled and rotated free from the lip of the pit along pre-
existing fractures. Examination of the lip of the pit before
entering the cave had suggested it was solid bedrock.
1. David Herron, Incident Report, 26 January 2021.
Comments: It is often difficult to tell bedrock from
"float" (unattached pieces of rock in the sediments) around
and inside of a sinkhole cave entrance. Sloping sinkholes,
especially in higher latitude or alpine terrain where season-
al freeze-thaw cycles and frost shatter are significant erosive
forces, often contain fractured and weathered bedrock that
should be inspected carefully when rigging. When possible,
cavers should consider suspending rigging off of pit slopes
with a redirect or isolating sections of pit with rebelays to
reduce the likelihood of prying blocks at the lip loose under
a tensioned rope.


********** 21 September 2019
Toothbrush Cave, Utah
rockfall, injury and aid
Three people entered Toothbrush Cave with some rap-
pelling gear but no helmets. The cave begins with a steep,
rubble-strewn floor that leads to a 20-foot drop. A 20-year-
old man rappelled the drop and at some point was struck
on the head by a cantaloupe-sized rock. It is not clear how
the rock became dislodged.
The man temporarily lost consciousness but was awake
when rescuers arrived. The Uintah County Sheriff and SAR
team packaged the man in a litter and raised him out of the
cave with a high-angle rope rescue system. He was trans-
ported by ambulance to a medical center in Vernal, Utah.
1. Graham Dudley, "Man rescued from Uintah County cave after
large rock hit him in the head," www.ksl.com, 21 September
2019.
2. Nate Carlisle, "Spelunker is rescued from eastern Utah cave,"
www.sltrib.com, 23 September 2019.
Comments: Helmets are essential safety gear for any
vertical rope work, especially in potential rockfall zones.
This pit in particular is exceptionally configured to send
rocks down toward your head while climbing or rappel-
ling; a large slope of loose frost-shattered rock funnels into
the pit. The rig point outside of the cave makes it difficult to
keep the tensioned rope from contacting rocks on the slope
while a caver is beneath. Similar to the previous incident,
this is another case where isolating the pitch into several
segments may improve overall safety.

---------- Page 17 ----------


********** 22 September 2019
Mine Shaft Cave, Missouri
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
Mine Shaft Cave is a dolomite cave that was filled with
clay and mined for the clay's lead content. A group of cav-
ers was surveying the system and rigged the 90-foot mined
entrance pit. The pit is 6 feet by 6 feet square. The top is
covered by a heavy steel cupula gate with side access. A
300-foot, 11-mm PMI Pit rope was rigged to the cupula gate
in such a way that two ropes were available for rappelling
or climbing. About 100 feet of rope remained on the surface.
Several cavers had already climbed out and left the area
before the last group started up. A male caver (25) from the
second group started up one of the ropes. After a while, a
female caver started up the second rope and found the male
caver still on rope and having difficulty ascending. She saw
that his chest harness was very loose and a bungie cord was
caught in one of his ascenders. Her attempt to help adjust
his harness was unsuccessful, SO she continued to the top to
notify two cavers still at the surface that someone was stuck
on rope. The topside cavers yelled down to the stuck caver
and learned that his chest harness was about to slip off over
his head, he did not have a rappelling device on his person,
and he was exhausted.
Alex Litsch rappelled the second rope to see if he could
help. Litsch carried a rope tether, a spare Croll and rap-
pel rack, and carabiners. He found the stuck caver nearly
horizontal with his knees at his chest about 40 feet above
the floor. The stuck caver was wearing an old variation of a
ropewalker system with a Pantin and Basic ascenders con-
nected by a bungie. He had a QAS attached to the rope,
but the length of webbing was too long for his reach. His
chest roller was a Simmons single roller that had about a
6-inch gap between the roller box and his chest due to the
chest harness being extremely loose; he was at high risk of
slipping out of his chest harness. His seat harness was a
rock-climbing style harness, and he had no other ascend-
ers on him. Litsch also discovered that the stuck caver had
attached his QAS tether to his leg loop and this is what he
had been hanging by. Fortunately, Litsch was able to attach
the spare Croll to the caver's belay loop and get the caver's
weight transferred to it. The caver was now safe from fall-
ing out of his chest harness.
Next, Litsch attached the rope tether between his rack
and the other caver's harness in preparation for a pick off.
By now, the other caver was too exhausted to detach him-
self from his rope, SO cavers at the top slowly lowered the
stuck caver's rope until his weight was transferred to Litsch.
Litsch was then able to rappel himself and the exhausted
caver carefully to the floor.
At the entrance, Chad McCain built a 3:1 haul system.
McCain describes the rigging as
"
fairly straightforward,
as there were ample trees around to rig to; however, the
main issue was the cupola gate over the pit which required
a deviation inside the gate, hanging from the roof of the
gate, to keep the rope from rubbing on the steel of the gate
during the hauling. The deviation required three long run-
ner slings around angle iron, and fed through the expanded
metal to hang a pulley to keep the rope off of all contact
points. After the 3:1 Z-rig was set up, [we] hauled [him] out
in a few minutes."
1. Chad McCain, Incident Report, 11 December 2019.
Comments: There is much to examine here for the dis-
cerning ACA reader. First, the second rope rigged in the en-
trance provided not only travel efficiency for a large group,
but also played a crucial role in patient access and assess-
ment and in the two-rope pickoff maneuver. Second, the
topside team had the skills, gear, and critical thinking to
rescue a caver from one of the most perilous situations in
vertical caving-being stuck on rope. The cavers-turned-
rescuers assessed that the stuck caver was in a critical situ-
ation and needed to be lowered to the ground before they
attempted to build a haul system. This can seem counter-
intuitive at first, but getting the patient off rope ASAP is the
priority, and lowering can often be accomplished in much
less time than building an efficient haul system. Once the
caver was safely off-rope, the team had time to build a haul
system that accounted for and mitigated the potential fric-
tion issues. This resulted in a smooth, efficient haul of the
patient to the surface.
Third, in the interesting "team pickoff" maneuver,
when ready to rappel the patient to the ground, note that
Litsch suspended the patient from the shared descent de-
vice rather than from his own seat harness. This is signifi-
cant as it is not only more comfortable than hanging the
patient from his harness connection, it also allows him as
the rescuer a ready means of escape should the two-person
rappel become fouled. Pickoffs are inherently risky for res-
cuers. This pickoff method mitigated some of the risk with
help from above in the load transfer and in the tandem rap-
pel connection choices.
Lastly, the poorly tuned and poorly fitting SRT system
seems difficult to avoid as the root cause of this incident. It
is generally considered careless to ascend a pitch with no
means of changing over to rappel. Systems should be tuned
to function for a particular individual. Harnesses and straps
that are obviously loose, worn, or made of inappropriate
materials are incidents waiting to happen. Sometimes these
defects are difficult to detect in advance, but all cavers have
some level of responsibility to speak up and attempt to cor-
rect when these types of things are observed, as doing SO
can prevent incidents and rescues. The real skill is found in
those that make these subtle corrections while maintaining
a positive learning experience for all involved.


********** 28 September 2019
Salamander Cave, Arizona
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
At a caver campout event, a group of six cavers entered
Salamander Cave in Arizona. The entrance is a three-pitch
drop of approximately 40 feet. Deeper in the cave is an 85-
foot pit. One caver (32) successfully descended the first pit
and was trying to remove her harness for the short trek be-
tween the first and second drops when her D-ring maillon
became stuck partially open. Her harness had metal attach-
ment points, and the D-ring was not open enough to get

---------- Page 18 ----------
either metal attachment out. She also could not close the D-
ring. The other cavers tried everything that they could think
of (pliers, water to lubricate, using another link to wrench
the opening, etc.). The D-ring was completely stuck.
Another caver loaned her a D-ring to descend the sec-
ond drop, and she clipped her gear and harness to it, es-
sentially bypassing the stuck D-ring. However, for the exit
climb, there was no good way to pass the borrowed D-ring
between her and its owner without it getting hung up along
the way. The team discussed this and decided to have her
use an oval carabiner to replace her D-ring with the hope
that the harness straps and Croll would load along the ma-
jor axis, rather than tri-loading the carabiner. On exiting
the cave, the caver loosened all of her straps and easily re-
moved the harness.
1. Sarah Truebe, Incident Report, 20 November 2019.
Comments: In her report, Truebe says it is still unclear
why the D-ring stuck. Incidents like these have led many
cavers to move to a harness connection with a swing gate,
notably the Petzl Omni. Screwlink D-rings are still favored
by many cavers due to their lack of a gate, which adds to a
secure look and feel. These users learn that the D-ring must
be kept closed, even when not in use. It is surprisingly easy
to tweak the open D-ring to where the threads will no lon-
ger match the sleeve. Know the limitations of your devices
and treat them accordingly.
The team devised solutions not only for the caver to
be safe to exit, but to also continue with the trip. When an
oval carabiner had to be substituted for the D-ring at the
entrance, they correctly assessed its limitations in contrast
to a D-ring, recognizing that the caver would need to keep
this carabiner connection tensioned in use at all times while
Shawn Thomas points to the end of a rope that broke
in Lechuguilla Cave. Photo by James Hunter.
ascending the narrow pit. Unloading the carabiner by us-
ing wall projections and footholds would have allowed it
to rotate into a less safe position, SO the cavers planned and
discussed this prior to action.


********** 6 October 2019
Valhalla Cave, Alabama
other (wasp sting while on rope), no injury, no aid
Ten people went to Valhalla Cave with the intent of rap-
pelling into and climbing out of the entrance pit. After five
people rappelled into the cave, the sixth caver, a man in his
late 20s, got on rope. He left a large pack at the surface and
carried a smaller pack into the cave. His ascending equip-
ment was inside this smaller pack.
Approximately 10 feet into his rappel, he was stung
by wasps. The caver is highly allergic to bee stings, and his
Benadryl® and EpiPen® were in his large pack on the sur-
face. He was unable to do a quick changeover because his
ascending gear was in his cave pack. He called up to the
surface to let others know he needed his personal medical
kit and then rappelled to the bottom of the pit. As soon as
he called "off rope," the next caver quickly descended with
the requested medical supplies. The caver took some Bena-
dryl®, but did not feel the need to use the EpiPen®.
After a few minutes of rest, the caver decided to exit the
cave and started to climb the rope. After ascending about
100 feet, he became exhausted and was unable to continue.
Fortunately, the group included experienced SAR mem-
bers, and they quickly constructed a 9:1 mechanical advan-
tage haul system and hauled him out.
1. Kimberly Lughart, Incident Report, 26 January 2021.
Comments: Vertical cavers should plan ahead for un-
foreseen problems. One of the most basic ways of doing
this is to wear ascending and descending gear regardless of
intended direction of travel on the rope. Many cavers and
medics would likely argue that essential drugs and medical
gear should be along for the ride, rather than left behind on
the surface.
There are many safety, medical, and psychological rea-
sons to have a rested and recovered patient attempt to leave
a vertical cave under their own power. Sometimes it doesn't
work out. Cavers-turned-rescuers are advised to plan ahead
for problems with possible solutions for haul or lower. This
team of trained rescuers was able to quickly build and haul.
In many cases it is advisable to pre-rig a caving trip for res-
cue with an easily converted haul or lower system.


********** 23 October 2019
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
During a resurvey of the Way Beyond Reason Room, a
team composed of Max Wisshak, James Hunter, and Shawn
Thomas experienced a major rope failure when a rope,
likely placed in 1988, broke while they were jump testing it
from the bottom.
The trio was resurveying the room to improve the origi-
nal sketch. Hunter decided to climb a rope that had been

---------- Page 19 ----------
left by previous explorers to redo a survey shot and check
for leads at the top. The rope was an 11-mm rope of un-
known brand, and about 25 feet of it was on the ground.
The sheath appeared to be fuzzy, but the fuzziness was uni-
form throughout the length that they could examine, and
they observed no visible bad spots.
Having a significant amount of experience caving and
climbing in Lechuguilla Cave, Hunter says that he is always
suspicious of old anchors in the cave. He connected to the
rope with both ascenders and sat down hard on the rope
a couple of times. Then he moved his ascenders up higher
and did a jump test, letting all of his weight (190 pounds
with gear) fall onto the rope. The rope broke.
The location of the break was 15 feet above the ground,
away from any knots or rock and above Hunter's ascenders.
The cavers put a section of the rope with the broken end in
a Ziploc bag and gave it to the cave resource managers for
further analysis.
In their report, Wisshak and Hunter offer the following
possible explanations for the rope failure: The spot where it
broke may have been at the edge near the top of the climb
where it got abraded but was flipped at a later time. Prior
to getting installed on the climb, the rope could have expe-
rienced damage from rockfall. The rope may not have been
new when it was installed, and its history, age, and use
were not known. Or, the rope may have simply aged in the
30 years it had been in the cave to a degree that decreased
its strength to the present critical value. For more infor-
mation on the subsequent rope analyses, see Ron Miller's
presentation, "How Strong is that Rope?" in the Lechuguilla
Cave 150th Mile webinar symposium, available on the NSS
uTube channel.
1. Max Wisshak and James Hunter, "Incident Report: Rope fail-
ure in EX23A-28 climb in Way Beyond Reason Room," 2 Novem-
ber 2019.
Comments: Wisshak and Hunter make the recommen-
dations that, "Although the unknowns associated with this
rope may mean that this is an isolated event, we believe that
all expedition leaders should be notified of this incident for
safety awareness. In addition, we recommend that, at mini-
mum, a two-person load test be performed before ascend-
ing any unknown ropes in Lechuguilla Cave." This is good
advice for unknown ropes in any cave.


********** 23 November 2019
Valhalla Cave, Alabama
fatality, caver fall
A 21-year-old college student fell 200 feet while trying
to rappel Valhalla Cave's entrance pit. Trever Col was visit-
ing the cave with four other students from Purdue Univer-
sity. The group had caving experience and a permit. They
did not, however, have a rope long enough for the entrance
drop, SO they tied two ropes together using a double-fish-
erman's knot. When they rigged the ropes, they did SO in a
way that placed the joining knot just below the lip of the pit.
Col rappelled first. When he reached the knot, he re-
rigged his rappel rack below the knot and locked it off. At
some point, however, Col became detached from his rack
and he fell about 200 feet. Members of his group on the sur-
face called 911 but did not attempt to enter the cave.
Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue Squad (CHCRS)
responded. They pulled the rope out of the pit and found
Col's standard length, six-bar SMC rappel rack attached to
the rope and locked off. Upon reaching the victim, who had
died from the fall, rescuers examined the rest of his gear.
Attached to his harness D-ring was a partially open cara-
biner; a small notch in the carabiner's sleeve suggests that
Col's weight forced it open.
Interviews with the reporting party revealed that the
group had rigged and rerigged the pit several times, trying
to get their primary rope to reach the bottom. When that
was not possible, they tied two ropes together. Col, being
the most confident in his knot-passing abilities had gone
first. The group also indicated that they had intended to
share and pass gear up and down the pit. This implies that
the group did not have adequate gear. In addition to psy-
chological stress and the knot-crossing, this is likely why
they made the decision to not enter the cave to check on the
victim's welfare.
1. Joshua Rhett Miller, "Purdue student falls 200 feet to his death
inside Alabama cave," www.nypost.com, 25 November 2019.
2. Dave Bangert, "Purdue student dies after falling 200 feet while
rappelling in Alabama cave," www.jconline.com, 24 November
2019.
3. Jason Duaine Hahn, "21-Year-Old Purdue University Student
Falls 200 Feet to Death in Alabama Cave," www.people.com, 25
November 2019.
4. Brad Tipton, Incident Report, 25 January 2021.
Comments: The carabiner found on Col's D-ring had
the small characteristic notch of a locked carabiner that has
had its gate locking sleeve broken open (often inward) by
torque forces applied by other hardware in a locked-gate
rollout failure. When carabiner gates are cross-loaded in
a configuration that produces torque forces, they can fail
under a single body weight. In other incidents, carabiners
that have inadvertently become unlocked have opened and
detached under rollout conditions. Locked or unlocked, in
either case these failures often result from situations where
previously tested and loaded "chains of hardware" (for ex-
ample a linked carabiner and descender) go from a state
of being loaded to being unloaded and then reloaded. The
chain of hardware goes slack when unloaded and is prone
to rotation and cross-loading. It can be difficult to notice
the moment of rotation, as this usually happens at a ledge,
knot, rebelay, or other type of obstacle. These obstacles pro-
vide distractions in addition to mechanisms for unloading
the descender.
The available facts suggest that Col likely used some
number of ascenders to aid in the knot-crossing, but must
have removed the last one from the rope without perform-
ing a successful three-point rappel test including visual,
tactile, and operational checks of his descending system.
Cavers should look at, and feel their descending system
(including the connecting hardware) before loading or re-

---------- Page 20 ----------
loading any descent device and then test operate the de-
vice. At least one of these points of a rappel test should have
caught a cross-loaded carabiner. Many cavers use a screw-
link between their rack and D-ring, with the 7-mm, long
oval being a popular choice. This connector can be lightly
wrenched shut, preventing it from opening inadvertently.
In addition, its narrow width prevents cross-loading, elimi-
nating the hazard. Many other cavers prefer the versatility
of a carabiner, as they can attach and detach the descender
as needed. This is acceptable practice when incorporating
the three-point rappel test before every loading event. In
contrast, bobbin descenders must be used with a carabiner
and specifically should not be used with a small screw-link,
as doing SO has led to the side plate opening during rap-
pel. For best results, know the proper connectors for your
descending device, and perform a three-point rappel test
before committing your weight to any single-point-of-at-
tachment descending system.
This group had been trained in vertical caving tech-
niques and may have been competent to complete the trip
had their single rope reached the bottom. Because their rope
did not reach, the conditions of the trip changed, and the
obstacles became more than they were prepared to negoti-
ate. It can be difficult to call off a trip in the face of adver-
sity, but when stretched beyond capacity, the best decision
is often to retreat and live to cave another day. The mere
fact that this group planned to pass gear up and down a
227-foot pit is a major warning sign and speaks to a lack
of experience across the group. The American caving com-
munity would do well to study this incident in order to find
ways to better educate interested groups. Anyone curious
about vertical caving should be properly educated to the
inherent risks, needed training, and appropriate gear and
techniques in hopes of preventing further tragedies.


********** 25 November 2019
Bisaro Anima, British Columbia, Canada
caver fall, injury, no aid
On the second day of a multiday expedition to push the
bottom of Bisaro Anima by diving, Kathleen Graham (38)
fell a short distance at Vimy Ridge, 400 meters below the
surface.
The caving team was accompanied by a filming crew
on this expedition. Graham and Christian Stenner were
asked to do an "action shot" of the two of them carrying
their heavy packs over Vimy Ridge. Graham explains, "We
tried to climb smoothly with our heavy bags as we were
being filmed. Then the scene cut and we were asked to do
it again. Much to my relief, two other headlamps came into
view. Now they could redo the scene and we were free
to go. I hurriedly made my way around the clutter of hu-
mans. I went off route to get away from the lights, bags and
people, scampering down the slope of unstable basketball-
sized rocks. Then I was moving and the rocks were moving,
I wanted to get out of the way, I didn't want to drop off the
side, but I wasn't in control."
After she stopped moving, she had pain in her ankle but
she could bear weight. She was assisted to Camp 1.5, a short
distance above Vimy Ridge, where she spent the night. The
next day Graham was accompanied by three other cavers
who assisted her to Camp 0.5. They carried supplies in case
progress was slow and another camp could not be reached
in a day. Meanwhile, other cavers assisted by improving
the rigging of some unprotected traverses between Camp 2
and Camp 1 to assist her exit. However, as she could bear
weight, she was able to move through the cave on her own,
needing only a hand in a few spots. Support in the form of
first-aid tape was applied to the ankle, and her rubber boot
helped minimize movement. She spent a day at Camp 0.5
resting before exiting the cave the next day. She spent two
more days on the surface before the scheduled helicopter
pickup for the entire team. Upon reaching a hospital six
days after the incident, Graham had surgery to her ankle; a
plate and six screws were placed to repair her broken ankle.
1. Katie Graham, e-mail communication, 23 January 2019.
2. Christian Stenner, Kathleen Graham, Adam Walker, and Jer-
emy Bruns, "The Battle of Bisaro Anima," The Canadian Caver, #88
(Winter 2020), pp. 5-16.
Comments: Taking a less traveled route where the rocks
have not settled, carrying heavy weight, and the pressure of
a serious dive along with frustrations from delays due to
filming are likely contributors to the incident. The last thing
to happen, the fall, is only one aspect of a chain of contrib-
uting factors that can be present in any incident. If the seri-
ousness of the ankle break had been known, it might have
caused the group to take more caution during the three-day
exit and the additional two days on the surface. This can be
hard to assess with a hardy patient and the appearance of
a less serious injury. This incident illustrates how a caver
with one injured limb can often aid in their own rescue, in-
cluding significant ropework with a bit of assistance and
additional rigging.


********** 30 November 2019
Bisaro Anima, British Columbia, Canada
other (injured while crawling), injury, no aid
On the last day of a six-day expedition, the caving
team's objective was to move equipment bags back to the
surface. While moving heavy equipment bags through a
crawlway above Camp 0.5, Jared Habiak (32) hit a rocky
projection on the floor with his chest, causing great pain. He
guarded the injury as best he could and climbed out of the
cave on his own, including a 60-meter and 105-meter pitch
along with some shorter pitches. The team spent the next
day on the surface packing and awaiting helicopter pickup.
Upon returning home and seeking medical attention, Ha-
biak was diagnosed with a broken rib.
1. Christian Stenner, Kathleen Graham, Adam Walker, and Jer-
emy Bruns, "The Battle of Bisaro Anima," The Canadian Caver, #88
(Winter 2020), pp. 5-16.
Comment: Heavy bags and expedition fatigue likely
contributed to this incident.

---------- Page 21 ----------
2019 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents


********** 9 February 2019
El Dudu Cave System, Dominican Republic
two fatalities, drowning
Two Italian divers, Carlo Basso and Carlo Barbieri, per-
ished in the El Dudu cave system in the Dominican Repub-
lic on 9 February 2019. Neither diver was certified for cave
diving, and neither was using gear suitable for cave diving.
The divers entered the cave at about 11:50 a.m., and
when they had not returned by mid-afternoon, Phillip
Lehman of the Dominican Republic Speleological Society
(DRSS) was notified. Lehman and Angel Compres initiated
a search without knowing what sections of the cave the div-
ers had planned to visit. They discovered significant silt in
their search, and they used that silt as a guide to where the
divers may have gone. The silt led them into a tight side
passage with extremely poor visibility; here they found a
broken guideline going into the side passage. After a con-
siderable search in worsening visibility, they called off the
search. The next day the silt continued to impair visibility.
As a result, the search continued for several days without
any results.
On 12 February, one of the bodies was found in a side
passage typically accessed only by divers with side-mount
gear. Carlo Barbieri was caught in this tight space in such a
way that the team was unable to recover his body. Several
more attempts were made over the next few days.
By 21 February, only one of the missing divers had been
found, and his body was still unrecoverable. The local re-
covery team halted its recovery operation, and two Ameri-
can divers with expertise in body recoveries and working in
low visibility agreed to resume the effort. At first, Edd So-
renson and Mike Young had difficulty entering the country.
The government felt that because the missing divers had
not been recovered yet, it must be too difficult and danger-
ous. Officials finally agreed to let the Americans try, giving
them eight days before ending all attempts at recovery.
On their first attempt, Sorenson was able to secure the
body using a specialized harness that he had constructed.
Young assisted by clearing rock and maintaining the line.
Working in zero visibility with a four-point anchor system
they had built, Sorenson and Young were able to bring the
body to the cavern zone, where divers from the Dominican
Republic navy helped bring the body of Carlo Barbieri to
the surface. That recovery took about four hours.
The next day Sorenson and Young searched for the sec-
ond diver, Carlo Basso. Passing beyond the location of the
first victim, again working in zero visibility, Sorenson en-
countered walls, which indicated that they were at the end
of the passage. At that point he found the second body, fac-
ing back toward him and slightly down in a crevice. Soren-
son cut Basso's back-mounted cylinder off; the cylinder im-
mediately floated up, indicating that it was empty. He later
cut the staged front-mounted cylinder loose, and it sank
into the crevice, indicating that it must have been full. That
cylinder had also been entangled with a large mass of cave
line that Basso had apparently pulled loose along the way.
While doing this work, Sorenson could not maintain
contact with their cave line, SO Young kept one hand on the
line and one hand on Sorenson to enable him to work in
safety. Once Sorenson cut the tangle of cave line away, they
were able to pull Basso to the site where the other diver had
been found. They then followed the same recovery process
as had been used before with Barbieri. The second recovery
took approximately four hours.
1. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 27 Decem-
ber 2020.
Comments: It is difficult to determine what caused the
fatalities, and what follows is only one theory. After enter-
ing the cave, and while following the main permanent cave
line, the divers came to what is called a "jump" - another
line leading off to a side passage; that is almost certainly
how they came to where they were found. Following stan-
dard protocols, this jump started several feet away from the
main line SO that divers would not mistakenly follow it. If a
diver intends to follow it, standard procedure is to make a
temporary connection between the jump and the main line
using a jump reel. That temporary connection is supposed
to be removed upon exit.
When the recovery effort began, a jump reel was found
at that location. It is possible that a previous diver had
placed it there and not removed it, as should have been
done, and that Basso and Barbieri decided to follow it. It
is also possible that Basso and Barbieri put it there them-
selves, intending to take that jump. They may have known
that it connected back to the main line at a point closer to
the entrance, and they may have intended to make a cir-
cuit by following that jump line. (Circuits are considered
an advanced skill and are taught only in the final portion of
cave-diving certification.) Whatever the reason, Basso and
Barbieri took that jump and followed it, running back par-
allel to the main line. They then came to a "T" intersection.
Turning to the right would have taken them safely back to
the main line, the completion of the circuit, and the exit.
That "T" intersection may have been a surprise to them, in
which case they may not have known which direction to go.
They turned left instead, which led them into an increas-
ingly narrow, silty passage appropriate only for advanced
divers using side-mount gear.
Evidence suggests that as they went through that pas-
sage, the lead diver (Basso) had his front-mounted stage
cylinder entangled in the line and that the line broke as
he continued forward. The entangled line followed him,
SO that when they came to the end of the passage, realized
their mistake, and turned around, there was no guideline
for Barbieri to follow back. They may have been nearing
the end of their air supply then as well. Basso was evidently
unable to reach the regulator of his stage cylinder in those
tight quarters.
Whatever the actual story, the fact is that two divers
with no cave training and without appropriate equipment

---------- Page 22 ----------
entered a cave and attempted a dive requiring advanced
training and equipment. If they intended to complete a cir-
cuit, which is an advanced skill, they did not follow correct
procedure. They should have verified the exit, a process
which would have included placing a personal marker on
the exit side of the "T" intersection. As a result, not only did
they die on that dive, they created an extremely hazardous
recovery situation that could have taken the lives of the re-
covery divers.


********** 16 April 2019
Mill Pond Cave, Tennessee
stranded, aid, no injury
On Tuesday, 16 April, a group of British cave divers
were exploring Mill Pond Cave, a cave described as "treach-
erous" due to its tight passages and low visibility. The team
included Josh Bratchley, a diver who had helped rescue a
boys' soccer team from a cave in Thailand in 2018.
During the dive, a dive line broke, and around 6:00
p.m., Bratchley became separated from his team. His team
spent several hours looking for him, but eventually called
authorities at 1:00 a.m. on Wednesday. Because of the cave's
difficulty, local authorities called Edd Sorenson from Flor-
ida. Sorenson has performed several cave-diving rescues
and dangerous body recoveries over the last several years
and is considered the most skilled person for cave-diving
rescues. Sorenson arrived in Nashville on Wednesday at
3:00 p.m., and he entered the water at 6:00 p.m.
Sorenson was not in the cave long before he found
Bratchley. Bratchley had located an air pocket while trying
to find his way out of the cave. He decided that it would be
better to wait for rescue than risk running out of air trying
to find the way out. Sorenson questioned Bratchley to assess
his physical and mental state. Bratchley was calm and alert
and was able to follow Sorenson out of the cave to safety.
1. Kyle Davis, "Thai rescue team diver trapped in Tennessee cave
rescued," www.abc15.com, 17 April 2019.
2. Meagan Flynn, "A diver who helped rescue the Thai soccer
team was just saved from an underwater cave in Tennessee,"
www.washingtonpost.com 18 April 2019.
3. Remington Hernandez, "Video Shows Rescue of Diver
Trapped in Tennessee Cave," www.yournewsnet.com, 19 April
2019.


********** 24 November 2019
Manatee Springs, Florida
fatality, drowning
On 24 November 2019, Zhou Min (28) of China died in
a cave-diving accident in Manatee Springs in north Flori-
da. Zhou was diving with her husband and two other div-
ers who had come to Florida from China with the express
purpose of diving Manatee Springs. Zhou was a relatively
newly certified cave diver, described by her certifying agen-
cy (World Underwater Discovery, or WUD) as having 11
hours of experience. The others, including a cave-diving in-
structor, had more experience, including in Florida.
The flow into the Manatee Springs headspring is nor-
mally very strong, SO divers do not enter the cave system
at that point. They instead frequently enter at a nearby
sinkhole called Catfish Hotel and then proceed upstream
through the cave, encountering other openings (Sue's Sink
and Friedman Sink) along the way. Such trips sometimes
are done as traverses, meaning the divers enter in one area
and exit in another.
In years past, divers would sometimes go downstream
from Catfish Hotel and exit the cave at the Manatee Springs
headspring, an adventurous traverse in the high flow.
However, collapses in the passage near the headspring in
recent years have made the opening much smaller and the
exit more dangerous, and local experts warn that this is no
longer a safe practice. In November 2019, rains had made
the current even stronger than normal, making such a tra-
verse even more dangerous.
The group was led by Wang Yuan, a WUD cave-diving
instructor with more than 500 hours of experience, includ-
ing experience in Florida caves (although not in the last few
years). He reported that he has made the trip from Catfish
Hotel to the Manatee Springs exit three times in the past,
but he was not aware of the recent changes to the opening
of the spring. The group's dive plan called for them all to
exit downstream into Manatee Springs.
That plan called for team 1 (Wang Yuan and Chen
Qian) to enter the cave at Catfish Hotel wearing rebreathers
and using dive propulsion vehicles (scooters) to go against
the current past Friedman Sink and then turn around to join
team 2. Team 2 (Zhou Min and her husband, Fu Xiaoyu)
was to enter Catfish Hotel an hour later wearing LP 95
back-mounted double cylinders, do a short dive on their
own, meet up with team 1, and then proceed with team 1
downstream to the Manatee Springs exit.
Normal cave diving protocols call for verifying the vi-
ability of a planned exit on a traverse before the dive. This
would normally mean going to the Manatee Springs area
and inspecting it. They did not do this. According to his
description of the incident, Wang Yuan believed that he and
Chen Qian could tie off their guideline to the end of the
main line before the spring and inspect the exit from within
the cave before exiting, apparently assuming they would
be able to turn the dive and return to Catfish Hotel if there
were any perceived problems.
Wang reported that the flow was light when they tied
off a reel to the main line and headed toward the exit. This
called for them to ascend a slope, and as soon as they did,
they were caught in a current that was too much to handle.
He tried to hold onto stones to hold his position but could
not do SO. The current tore at his mask and his rebreather,
interfering with his ability to breathe through it. Yuan was
soon thrown out of the cave by the current.
According to Wang, he tried to get back into the cave to
help the others. He could see light signals calling for help.
At that point Fu Xiaoyu was also thrown out of the cave.
Wang could see that Chen Qian was unconscious with the
regulator still in his mouth, and he could see that past him
Zhou Min did not have her regulator in her mouth. Chen's
scooter and light head were firmly wedged in the rocks.
Wang cut him free from the scooter, after which Chen was
also thrown out of the cave. Wang decided to hope someone

---------- Page 23 ----------
on the outside could take care of Chen while he tried to get
Zhou. He said he was unable to get to her because of the
current and decided to return to help Chen. Wang and Fu
found Chen and were able to revive him.
Per standard procedure, a team from the International
Underwater Cave Rescue and Recovery organization was
called to recover the body. They were able to do SO the next
day, but it required great effort and several dives.
1. Sarah Nelson, "Cave diver dies, became trapped in 'chimney,"
www.gainesville.com, 25 November 2019.
2019 Caving-Related Accidents and Incidents


********** 12 April 2019
Stephens Gap Cave, Alabama
fatality, fell into cave
Juan Gerardo Cruces (25) was reported missing on
12 April 2019 when he did not return home from a trip to
Stephens Gap Cave. Authorities located Cruces' car at the
cave's parking area but did not find evidence of him at the
cave. The Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit was called to assist,
and they searched the cave more thoroughly. Cruces body
was located; he had apparently died from an approximately
150-foot fall from the surface. The victim had a permit to
hike to the cave, but there is no indication he had intended
to enter it.
1. Ashley Thusius, "Madison man was found dead in a cave in
Jackson County on Friday," www.waaytv.com, 15 April 2019.
2. Laura Christmas, "A Madison man died in an apparent ac-
cident while at a Jackson County cave," www.whnt.com, 15 April
2019.
3. Kimberly Lughart, email communication, 25 January 2021.


********** 1 June 2019
unspecified cave, Florida
dog rescued from cave
A Florida man was hiking in Goethe State Forest when
he heard a dog whimpering in distress. He followed the
sounds until he located a dog stranded in a pit. The man
was not able to climb down to the dog, SO he dropped all
of his hiking snacks into the cave for the dog. He then went
home and asked for help on his nature website, Florida-
Trailblazer.com. A number of people responded, and the
next day the man led rescuers to the cave.
A good Samaritan rappelled into the cave and brought
the dog out. "The dog was SO happy. She just rolled around
on the grass, wanting her belly rubbed." The dog, whose
name is Sally, was wearing a collar with her owner's phone
number. The owner was very happy to be reunited with
Sally, who had been missing for almost a month.
1. McKinley Corbley, "Dog is Finally Rescued by Hiker Three
Weeks After Falling into Cave Miles from Civilization," www.
goodnewsnetwork.org 5 June 2019.
2. Melanie Michael, "Florida hiker rescues dog trapped in cave
for 3 weeks," www.wptv.com, 6 June 2019.
3. Alan Cressler, personal communication, 14 January 2021.
2. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 30 Decem-
ber 2019.
Comments: The recovery required moving rocks and
removing her equipment. Since this incident, the main line
from Manatee Springs to Catfish Hotel has been removed,
and a warning sign has been placed to discourage divers
who enter at Catfish Hotel from heading toward Manatee
Springs.
Mike Priddy of TRACER rescues a calf that had fallen into a
sinkhole. Photo by Sherry Alvey Thompson.


********** 19 August 2019
unnamed sinkhole, Kentucky
calf rescued from sinkhole
A calf was rescued from a sinkhole by the Technical
Rope and Cave Emergency Response (TRACER) team from
Radcliff, Kentucky. The calf had been in the sinkhole for an
unknown period of time before it was discovered. TRAC-
ER's team leader Mike Wheeler said, "One thing that likely
helped the calf remain in such good condition was an old
cooler that had been tossed into the hole years prior. It had
collected enough rainwater to help stave off any dehydra-
tion in the calf. The temperature in the pit was about 54

---------- Page 24 ----------
degrees, SO it (the calf) was more comfortable than the rest
of us."
A rescuer entered the sinkhole and put a harness on
the calf. The calf was brought to the surface in less than 30
minutes.
1. The News-Enterprise, "Crews rescue calf from sinkhole,"
www.thenewsenterprise.com, 22 August 2019.
2. Mike Wheeler, email communication, 2 January 2021.
Comments: According to Wheeler, "So many times in
the past, we have heard of stories, after the fact, of land-
owners, unaware that rescue options were available, having
destroyed the animal in place because they could not see
a way of recovering them. Our team has taken hundreds
of hours of formal training and raised thousands of dollars
to obtain the specialized equipment necessary to perform
these dangerous tasks."
Like many rescue groups, TRACER relies on donations
to purchase the equipment necessary for performing tech-
nical rescues. Please support your local rescue groups.


********** 6 September 2019
unspecified sea cave, California
boat stuck in sea cave
Two men, ages 66 and 19, returning from a fishing trip
near Coronado Island put their 26-foot-long fishing boat on
autopilot while they slept. When they awoke, they found
that their large boat was being pushed into a narrow sea
cave near the tip of the Point Loma Peninsula.
Rescue crews were not able to maneuver a rescue boat
into the cave, SO lifeguards swam in and helped the two
men to swim out to the rescue boat. The fishing boat could
not be recovered for several days due to rough water. When
a boat salvage company made another attempt to recover
the boat a week later, they found that the rough water had
smashed the boat "as if it had been in a trash compactor."
1. Christina Bravo and Audra Stafford, "'Something Out of a
Movie: 26-Foot Fishing Boat Gets Stuck Inside Point Loma Cave,"
www.nbcsandiego.com, 6 September 2019.
2. Erika Cervantes, "Crews Begin Removing Wreckage of Boat
Stuck in Point Loma Cave," www.nbcsandiego.com, 13 Septem-
ber 2019.


********** 9 September 2019
Cueva de la Puente, San Luis Potosí, Mexico
caver fall, injury, and aid
Alicia Stanford (33), from Australia, was on an extend-
ed visit to San Luis Potosí, when friends suggested she join
them for a hike in the mountains. Stanford, along with four
others, were led through the forest to the opening of a large
cave at the bottom of a steep, rocky slope. The trip leader
said that they could spend one to five hours in the cave and
that crawling would be involved. Stanford did not know a
cave trip had been planned, and she expressed some anxi-
ety about crawling on her elbow, which had been fractured
a year prior. The leader dismissed her anxiety, and she de-
cided she would at least go down to the mouth of the cave.
As the group navigated down the slope toward the
cave, Stanford tripped and fell forward, landing face down.
She knew immediately that both her left leg and right arm
were fractured. When she attempted to stand, the pain was
SO intense that she "almost vomited." The trip leader and
others went for help. As the sun went down and the tem-
perature started dropping, Stanford and those who had
stayed with her realized that they had no food, water, or
extra clothing.
Five and a half hours after Stanford fell, volunteers
from a lime mine and the nearest city arrived. They strapped
Stanford to a backboard and applied inflatable splints to
her arm and leg. They carried her to the bed of a pickup and
then transferred her to an ambulance. During the long ride,
the ambulance crashed into a tree that had fallen across the
road. After the tree was cut and removed, the ambulance
continued on its way, reaching the hospital at 4:00 a.m.
An hour before surgery, the hospital informed Stanford
that they were unable to accept foreign insurance. Stan-
ford's health insurance provider worked with third parties,
but it took some negotiating with the hospital until they
agreed to operate before payment could be made.
Stanford endured many months of pain and immobili-
zation, difficulty returning to Australia, and several subse-
quent operations.
1. Richard Wood, "Gold Coast woman describes cave rescue
ordeal," www.9news.com.au, 14 October 2019.
2. Alicia Stanford, "365 DAYS LATER: ACCIDENT IN THE
MEXICAN DESERT," www.wonderswithalicia.com 9 Sept. 2020.
3. Jim Coke, email communication, 31 December 2020.
Comments: Cavers visiting foreign countries are ad-
vised to consult with a travel nurse before the trip to re-
ceive necessary vaccinations and health warnings for the
area being visited. A travel nurse can also provide insight
into medical capabilities for the travel destination and ad-
vice on whether to be treated locally or to evacuate to a dif-
ferent city or country for better treatment. Travelers should
be aware that their health insurance may not be valid every-
where and should consider purchasing additional medical
and rescue insurance to use in the unfortunate event that
their domestic plans will not provide for appropriate care.
Entrance to Cueva de la Puente. Photo from geocaching.com.

---------- Page 25 ----------


********** 4 November 2019
unnamed lava tube, Hawai'i
fatality, fell into cave
When a 71-year-old man had not been seen for a few
days, a friend became worried and called the police. At first,
nothing at the man's home in Hilo looked amiss. Police then
noticed a lawnmower and weed eater in the yard, and upon
investigation, they found that the man had fallen through a
small hole in the ground while trimming bushes. That hole
opened to a 20-foot drop into a lava tube. Police speculate
that the hole was hidden under dirt and vegetation and the
man did not know it was there.
1. Mihir Zaveri, "71-Year-Old Hawaii Man Dies After Falling into
Lava Tube," www.nytimes.com, 7 November 2019.
Comments: Care must be taken to prevent tragic ac-
cidents such as this when living, working, or traveling
through cave and karst terrain. In many cave areas, and
often in lava tube areas, there is only a thin overburden be-
tween the surface and any caves below, and holes in the
ground like the one that claimed this man's life may be hid-
den.


********** 7 November 2019
Capshaw Cave, Tennessee
car drove into cave, aid, no injury
A vehicle that was speeding on a wet road slid off the
road and into the entrance of Capshaw Cave. The driver
was uninjured, and the vehicle was promptly removed
from the cave entrance by a tow truck.
1. Chuck Sutherland, Incident Report, 7 November 2019.


********** 9 November 2019
unnamed sinkhole, Kentucky
calf rescued from sinkhole
A group of cavers was preparing for a survey trip when
a neighboring farmer knocked at their door, asking to bor-
row a rope. One of the farmer's calves was stuck in a sink-
hole. Cavers Chris Bauer, Adam Mathis, Angela Pullano,
and Laura Demarest offered to help.
The calf was badly wedged about 10 to 12 feet down in
a funnel-shaped sinkhole about three feet in diameter. The
calf had likely been there overnight.
Bauer used a reptile hook to position webbing under
the calf's chest and around a leg. Then, using a 3:1 mechani-
cal advantage haul system anchored to a tractor, the team
extricated the calf from the sinkhole. In her report, Demar-
est says, "The calf was stiff and exhausted but took a long
stretch, got to its feet with assistance and tottered over to
its anxious mother to nurse. About 10 minutes later it was
moving with no sign of injury - a success!"
1. Laura Demarest, Facebook post, 11 November 2019.
Comments: A few months later, the farmer brought a
Thanksgiving ham to the caver fieldhouse as a "thank you."
A car that slid off the road is towed from the entrance of Capshaw
Cave. Photo by Chuck Sutherland.
Cavers and farmers waiting for a calf to recover after being rescued
from a sinkhole. The caver in orange is sitting over the sinkhole.
Photo courtesy of Laura Demarest.

---------- Page 26 ----------
2020 Caving Accidents and Incidents


********** 17 January 2020
Heart of Gould Cave, Tennessee
rockfall, injury and aid
In January 2020, a group of cavers was exploring Heart
of Gould Cave, rigging and exploring virgin pits as well
as performing lead climbs. After checking several pits and
promising leads, Jim Fox (50) was making his way back
down a number of pitches. He rappelled a short rope that
went over a boulder and ended at the top of a narrow ledge
that straddled two pits, one of those pits being 107 feet deep.
As he rappelled past the boulder, he saw that the boulder
was barely wedged in place and was starting to move to-
ward him. When he landed on the ledge, rocks began to fall.
The first rocks hit him in the face, cutting his nose badly.
The next rocks struck him in the shoulder, knocking him
down. More rocks hit his back, damaging a lung, which
caused him to cough up blood for a week. Finally, the big
boulder fell, fracturing Fox's femur.
While some members of Fox's group attended to his in-
juries, one caver went for help, calling 911 around 6:00 p.m.
The responding rescuers faced several challenges, includ-
ing packaging Fox into a litter on the narrow ledge strad-
dling two pits, blasting cave passages to widen them for
the litter, and negotiating several tight spots and vertical
obstacles. Fox reached the surface at about 3:00 a.m. and
was transported by ATV to a waiting ambulance.
This was an extremely technical rescue performed by
members of the Sparta-White County Rescue Squad, the
Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue Service Cave-Cliff
Team, the Knoxville Volunteer Emergency Rescue Squad,
and the Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit, among others.
1. Laura Halm, "East TN rescue crews speak on saving injured
man from cave," www.wjhl.com, 20 January 2020.
2. Joey Gill, "Man rescued from White County cave after being
stuck for hours with broken leg," www.wsmv.com, 20 January
2020.
3. Jim Fox, e-mail communication, 26 March 2020.
Comments: This cave rescue presented significant chal-
lenges and was likely successful due only to the high level
of skill and training of the responders as well as the sheer
toughness of the patient. Femur fractures are high-risk in-
juries that require skilled medical care and evacuation. This
rescue required medical care, rigging, passage modifica-
tion, and more, all by rescuers that can travel up and down
pits on their own. Cave rescue is a highly technical skill that
requires a lot of training to maintain competence. The suc-
cess of this rescue speaks highly to the teams' commitment
to readiness.


********** Photo, top right:
Jim Fox is administered an IV during his rescue from Heart of Gould
Cave. Photo by Rachel Saker.


********** Photo, bottom right:
Jim Fox is raised in a SKED after breaking his leg in Heart of Gould
Cave. Photo by Rachel Saker.

---------- Page 27 ----------


********** 25 January 2020
Weybridge Cave, Vermont
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
On 25 January around noon, eight cavers chipped the
ice out of the entrance to Weybridge Cave in Vermont as
part of a Boston Grotto trip. The group consisted of three
experienced cavers plus five people who were relatively
new to caving. Weybridge Cave is one of the few northeast
caves open in the winter; it features a relatively tight verti-
cal entrance consisting of two drops measuring 18 feet and
40 feet. Snowmelt had created a small but cold waterfall in
the entrance drops.
After the group explored the cave, the trip leader posi-
tioned the experienced cavers at the top and bottom of the
entrance pitches with the newer cavers in between them.
The first of the less experienced cavers to start up the 40-
foot pitch began experiencing difficulty just ten feet up
from the bottom. Directly in the flow of the cold waterfall,
the female caver (20) found that she could neither continue
up nor perform a changeover. Fortunately, she could be
pulled from below over to a large rock where she was able
to get off rope and climb back down. The caver was given
extra warm layers, and the rope was rerigged to be used as
a haul system. Other cavers exited at this time to contact
their surface watch since they were now past their sched-
uled callout time.
On her second attempt, the caver continued to have dif-
ficulty, SO she was hauled up the 40-foot pitch. With only
minor assistance, she was able to make it up the next, short-
er drop.
1. Steve Severance, Incident Report, 12 June 2020.
Comments: Severance believes that a lack of sufficient
food and water was the primary cause for the caver's dif-
ficulty on rope but acknowledges that more experience
may have helped her with performing a changeover in the
stressful situation. The group devised a good just-in-case
rescue plan, and it worked when the time came to use it.


********** 1 February 2020
Indian Grave Point Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, no aid
During a caving trip, a 20-year-old woman slipped
while attempting a short climb and fell on her wrist. A nurse
in the group examined the injury and believed that the wrist
may have been broken. An ACE bandage was used to wrap
the injured wrist, and cavers flanked the patient to help her
exit the cave without further injury. An X-ray revealed a
chipped bone in the caver's wrist.
1. Chuck Sutherland, Incident Report, 4 February 2020.
Comments: The trip leader reports that it was a chal-
lenging climb with slick surfaces. Scouting for an easier
way around the obstacle may have prevented the accident.
Injuries to the extremities are the most common caving inju-


********** ries, usually resulting from the most common incident type:
"caver fall."
Rescue scene at the back entrance of Whitings Neck Cave. Photo
by Earl Suitor.


********** 9 February 2020
Whitings Neck Cave, West Virginia
stuck, aid, no injury
On a Sunday afternoon, a call went out to the Beding-
ton Volunteer Fire Department and Martinsburg Fire De-
partment Special Operations Unit (MFDSOU) that a caver
was stuck in Whitings Neck Cave. MFDSOU contacted the
Eastern Region National Cave Rescue Commission (ERN-
CRC) Subregion Coordinator, Earl Suitor, who mobilized
local cavers.
The stuck caver was a man in his mid-20s who was
visiting the cave with a group of friends from a Baltimore,
Maryland, college. Rescuers report that the large man was
wearing appropriate clothing and gear for caving, includ-
ing a cave helmet with a headlamp. He became stuck in a
crevice, head up, pinned from his hips to his ribs, with his
arms free. The man's companions tried for an hour to free
him before calling for help.
Fortunately, the cave has two entrances, which allowed
rescuers to quickly reach him from both directions. Web-
bing was placed under the patient's arms, and a haul sys-
tem was established. Cavers assisted MFDSOU by adding
a Prusik to the haul system to capture any progress in the
patient's movement. The attempt at hauling ceased when
the patient complained of it being too painful. A ladder was
placed below the patient, and an air-bottle-powered chis-
el was called for to widen the space in case that would be
needed.
The patient was given food, water, and heat packs while
rescuers repositioned the haul system and made footloops
for the patient to stand in. The second attempt was success-
ful in extricating the man who had by now been stuck for
over four hours. He was able to exit the cave under his own
power.
1. Dave McMillion, "Man rescued from cave in Berkeley Coun-
ty," www.heraldmailmedia.com, 9 February 2020.
2. Earl Suitor, Incident Report, 16 April 2020.
Comments: In his report, Suitor describes the good re-
lationship between local cavers and the MFDSOU, which
has been built while rescue training and caving together. At
the time of this incident, the two groups had already sched-

---------- Page 28 ----------
uled a National Cave Rescue Commission (NCRC) Orienta-
tion to Cave Rescue (OCR) training together for later that
year; unfortunately, the OCR was ultimately cancelled due
to the COVID-19 pandemic.


********** 20 March 2020
Castleguard Cave, Alberta, Canada
caver fall, injury, no aid
A group of five cavers was traveling to camps deep with-
in Castleguard Cave for the first half of a 10-day expedition.
First Fissure is a 2-kilometer-long vadose passage requir-
ing constant bridging movements. While moving through
First Fissure on the way to Camp 1, Christian Stenner (40)
strained his right wrist after slipping and catching himself
a few times. The pain in his wrist worsened throughout the
expedition. On the last day, a hockey tape splint was ap-
plied, and Stenner was given painkillers to relieve the pain.
After the expedition ended, Stenner was diagnosed with a
sprain and spent a few weeks in a wrist brace.
1. Christian Stenner, "The Deep Camps," The Canadian Caver, 89,
2020.
Comment: Multiple slips and related strain can accu-
mulate, manifesting later in a trip. Stabilization of the in-
jured area can assist healing and recovery even if the injury
appears minor at first.


********** 11 May 2020
Lost River Cave, Kentucky
fatality, drowning
A 30-year-old man was seen jumping over a fence at the
entrance of Lost River Cave on a Monday evening. Authori-
ties responded to find that the victim had drowned in the
underground river. No further information was released.
1. Ana Medina, Brandon Jarrett, and Gene Birk, "Man identified
in Lost River Cave death investigation, no foul play suspected,"
www.wbko.com, 11 May 2020.


********** 23 May 2020
Scroll Cave, Arizona
lost/stranded, aid, no injury
A man and a woman in their early 20s with very little
caving experience entered Scroll Cave for a day of explor-
ing. They had difficulty finding their way out of the maze-
like cave and eventually ran out of light. When they did not
return home, their worried parents called 911.
The Pima County Sheriff contacted the NCRC South-
western Region Coordinator who then called local cavers.
The missing couple was found about 500 feet into the cave.
During the night, the couple collected and drank water from
a dripping formation. The couple and some of the rescuers
were hauled out of the entrance, which otherwise requires
stemming a chimney with 20 feet of exposure.
1. Timothy Clemmons, "Rescue groups save two lost and disori-
ented cavers," www.kvoa.com, 24 May 2020.
2. Sarah Truebe, Incident Report, 24 May 2020.


********** 30 May 2020
Valhalla Cave, Alabama
lost control on rappel, injury and aid
Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue Service
(CHCRS) Cave-Cliff Team and Jackson County Rescue re-
sponded to a report of a teenage girl having fallen at Val-
halla Cave. The reporting party was the girl's father.
A team was promptly sent down the pit to assess the
girl. The girl was found accompanied by the trip leader,
who was on the floor of the pit when the incident occurred.
The trip leader observed that the girl lost control of her rap-
pel early in the descent and accelerated rapidly toward the
floor of the pit. The girl hit the ground feet first, sustaining
a suspected pelvic injury and losing consciousness for an
extended period of time. The patient was packaged in a full-
body air splint and raised to the surface. From there, she
was air-lifted to an emergency center.
An interview with the trip leader led CHCRS to deter-
mine that he was inexperienced in single-rope techniques
(SRT) and unaware of how to properly execute a bottom-be-
lay to slow the girl's descent. Additionally, the father of the
patient told CHCRS that his daughter was inexperienced in
SRT and had previously rappelled only once in a shallow
pit two weeks prior. Other witnesses in the reporting party
observed that the girl started her rappel with only four bars
engaged on a standard six-bar rappel rack, as she had been
instructed to do.
1. Brad Tipton, Incident Report, 25 January 2021.
Comments: Valhalla is a 227-foot-deep pit, which is not
an appropriate choice for brand-new rappellers. Bottom
belay is a simple technique that can often be used safely,
especially when planned for. Care must be taken to ensure
that bottom belayers are not subjected to rock-fall hazard.
Best practice for a six-bar rack is to begin with all six bars
engaged and to then remove them as needed. Take caution
not to remove too many bars at the beginning of a rappel,
as your entire weight is not fully supported by the rap-
pel device until your legs are suspended in the air. If you
are working your way down a slope, a significant portion
of your weight is actually being supported by your legs,
which can make it seem like there is too much friction on
the device when in fact it is set correctly for the vertical por-
tion of the drop. It is better to fight too much friction on the
way to the edge rather than to get caught beneath the edge
with too little friction, rappelling out of control, and unable
to add a bar.


********** 13 August 2020
Bearcat Caves, British Columbia, Canada
difficulty on rope, aid, no injury
A group of three inexperienced cavers in their late 20s
went to the Bearcat Caves near Kamloops, British Colum-
bia. At least one member of the group had been to the caves
approximately 10 years earlier. One person from the group
had successfully rappelled into the cave but had difficulty
ascending out. A rescue call was initiated by his compan-
ions. As Alberta/BC Cave Rescue and Kamloops Search and

---------- Page 29 ----------
Rescue were getting to the site, the teams were asked to
stand down, as the subject had eventually climbed out on
his own.
1. Cassidy Simpson, Incident Report, August 2020.
Comments: If you are going to descend a rope, it is im-
portant to know how to ascend the rope when it is the only
way to get back out of the cave.


********** 13 September 2020
Snail Shell Cave, Tennessee
flooding, aid, no injury
Four people were exploring Snail Shell Cave when they
noticed the water in the underground stream was rising.
Unbeknownst to them, a thunderstorm was dropping 4 to 6
inches of rain on the surface and several counties had been
issued a flash flood warning. The two younger men made
it out of the cave, but the two older men took refuge on a
ledge above the water. Rescuers were able to bring the older
men out safely.
1. Yihyun Jeong, "Two men rescued after being trapped in
Rutherford cave with rising water," www.tennessean.com, 13
September 2020.
2. WGNS Radio, "Rockvale area Cave Rescue on Sunday," www.
wgnsradio.com, 13 September 2020.
Comments: Snail Shell Cave is part of a large under-
ground river system that collects and transports groundwa-
ter from a wide area. It should not be entered in high-water
conditions or when there is reason to expect significant rain.


********** 15 September 2020
Over the Hill Cave, British Columbia, Canada
rockfall, no injury, no aid
Four cavers were exploring a virgin cave named Over
the Hill Cave as part of an expedition exploring the area
near White Rabbit Cave. A 0.8-meter-high squeeze through
a boulder choke was encountered by the group. A few rocks
Karst window entrances to Snail Shell Cave. The unroofed river flows between the two portions of the cave. Photo by Dave Bunnell.
Water levels in Snail Shell Cave vary considerably with the seasons
and rain levels. Some portions require flotation year-round. Photo by
Dave Bunnell.
were removed using a webbing sling, and the four cavers
passed through without incident. On the way out, Claire
Gougeon (41) was the second person to pass through the
squeeze. While she was sliding on her back through the
squeeze, hundreds of pounds of rocks fell down. She was
fortunate to reach a more spacious area while the rocks set-
tled around her. Where her torso had been moments before
was now 20 centimeters deep in rock and touching her legs
on both sides. She was able to extract her legs without mov-
ing any more rocks.
The small exit now trapped the two cavers who were
still on the far side. Gougeon and the first caver who had
made it through began moving rocks to create a stable exit.
They were eventually able to move and stabilize enough
rocks to allow the other two cavers to pass through.
1. Claire Gougeon, personal communication, 20 October 2020.
Comments: Breakdown in virgin caves or passages has
considerable potential for grave consequences. In some cas-
es, a caver may be the first force to act upon an unstable pile
in thousands of years.

---------- Page 30 ----------


********** 17 October 2020
Nielsons Cave, Utah
caver fall, injury, no aid
Jason Weyland (25) and another caver entered Nielsons
Cave at 9:30 a.m. for a day of bolting pitches and inspect-
ing some domes for possible climbing leads. After descend-
ing the 317-foot entrance pit, they made their way through
several obstacles and smaller pitches until they reached
Fantasy Well, a 300-foot pit. The upper sections of the cave
had been left rigged from a previous trip, and rope for the
lower cave was stashed at the top of Fantasy Well. The rope
for Fantasy Well was attached, but not rigged, to the an-
chor, and the rest of the rope was already stuffed in a rope
bag. Weyland rigged the rope properly and attached the
rope bag to his harness. Letting the rope feed out of the bag
would eliminate his need for fighting with the weight of the
rope while descending.
About halfway down Fantasy Well, Weyland realized
that there were no grommets in the rope bag where the
knotted end of a rope could be visible. He shouted up to his
companion, who was the person who had stuffed the rope
bag, and asked if the end of the rope had a stopper knot in
it. His companion yelled back down the pit that yes, the
rope had a stopper knot.
Forty feet from the bottom of the pit, the rope suddenly
slipped through Weyland's braking hand and then his de-
scender. Weyland fell 20 feet to a sloped shelf then another
20 feet to the bottom of the pit, a total of 740 feet below
the surface. Weyland reports, "I was overcome with pain,
mainly focused in my right foot and my right hand. In the
process of falling, my headlamp was dislodged from my
helmet. However, I managed to stand up and worked my
way to my headlamp, gauging my pain as I made the effort.
I was able to walk, albeit with pretty severe pain in my right
foot."
Weyland's companion pulled up the rope and rigged
another rope to the end SO that he could reach Weyland.
Fortunately, the other caver is also a medical doctor and
was able to perform a thorough head-to-toe examination.
He determined that Weyland did not have any broken
bones, concussion, or other major trauma.
Jason Weyland's right foot two days after falling 40 feet in
Nielsons Well. Photo by Jason Weyland.
Not sure if he would be able to climb rope, Weyland
says that "I decided to just get on rope and see what it felt
like to climb a few feet. Amazingly, frogging didn't seem to
have any impact on my injuries, even with my foot loops
being on my bad foot. Feeling some relief with this revela-
tion, I was excited that I would still be able to use my Pantin
as well. With [the other caver] offering to carry my bag out,
I started my ascent of Fantasy Well." He continues, "Of all
the obstacles I faced on my way out of the cave, crossing
the big room to the entrance rope proved to be the most
painful as it requires walking across a football-field sized
room of large breakdown and shifting boulders." The cav-
ers reached the surface at 1:30 in the afternoon after four
hours in the cave. Weyland then hiked more than 3 miles
back to the trailhead, carrying his own pack. X-rays later
revealed no definite fracture and the patient was diagnosed
with a severe sprain to his right ankle and sprains to his
right thumb, left foot, and left wrist.
1. Jason Weyland, Incident Report, 21 October 2020.
Comments: In his report, Weyland, who is an experi-
enced caver, says that a tough lesson learned is to "Always
check for a stopper knot when getting on a rope already
rigged or stashed in a bag. Even if someone assures you that
they tied a knot in a stashed rope, make the extra effort to
check for a stopper knot."
The rope that Weyland rigged was one that had been
used in Fantasy Well in previous years. So why was it sud-
denly 40 feet too short? Rigging the pit had previously been
done by cavers rigging to an anchor at the top, rappelling
30 feet onto a flowstone ledge, and then rigging to another
anchor, thus creating a free hang to the bottom. In the past,
this had been done with two ropes, a shorter rope for the
top rappel and a longer rope for the second rappel. Wey-
land's companion had removed the ropes for inspection
and cleaning. When he and Weyland returned on this day,
the other caver forgot that Fantasy Well was usually rigged
with a second 40-foot rope and supplied Jason only with
what should have been the second rope. It is unclear why
this was forgotten, why there was no knot in the rope, or
why the other caver assured Weyland there was a knot in
the rope.
Considering this and other rappelling-from-rope-bag
incidents-some of them fatal-anyone planning on rap-
pelling from a rope bag should pack their own rope or vi-
sually inspect the rope to ensure that the end of the rope is
knotted. Some cavers like to put the rope through a grom-
met at the bottom of the bag SO that the knot is visible while
the bag is full. Other caving programs recommend putting
two stopper knots in the end of the rope, one at 6 feet from
the end of the rope and another closer to the end. This al-
lows the caver to discover the knot and still have a usable
piece below for attaching to another rope or rebelay.

---------- Page 31 ----------
2020 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents


********** 9 June 2020
Hole in the Wall Cave, Florida
fatality, drowning
Clyde Douglas (Doug) Rorex, age 68, died in the Hole
in the Wall Cave in Merritts Mill Pond in Marianna, Florida,
on 9 June 2020 when he ran out of breathing gas close to the
exit. Rorex was a highly experienced cave diver who lived
near the cave and was familiar with the caves in the area.
He was diving solo in a side-mount configuration, as he did
frequently at this cave.
When Rorex did not return from his dive at the expect-
ed time, the owner of a local dive shop, Edd Sorenson, was
contacted to see if he could help. Sorenson has made several
successful cave diving rescues in the area in the past, and
he is frequently called upon for body recoveries. Sorenson
entered the cave and quickly found Rorex deceased near the
entrance.
Hole in the Wall Cave is named SO because its entrance is
literally a hole in the wall of the pond. Divers enter that hole
and must immediately swim nearly straight down about 85
feet to the cave floor. At that point divers can choose to go
in two directions. Rorex was found at the bottom of that
chimney, with one of his regulators still in his mouth and
both cylinders empty. All of his equipment was later shown
to be working properly.
A subsequent analysis of Rorex's computer indicated
that the total dive time was only 45 minutes. Highly ad-
vanced divers, including trained cave divers, calculate the
rate at which they consume their air SO that they can plan
With proper training and
equipment, cave diving
is a sport safely enjoyed
by many.
Here a diver crosses a
halocline in Maya Blue,
a cave in the Yucatan
peninsula of Mexico. This
interface between fresh
and saltwater is typically
only observed in coastal
caves.
This photo earned an
Honorable Mention for SJ
Alice Bennett in the 2020
NSS Photo Salon.
dives effectively. With the amount of gas Rorex had, an av-
erage cave diver diving at that depth would have expected
to have enough gas for nearly twice that much time. This
indicates that something unusual must have happened on
the dive to cause an unexpected loss of air.
A computer profile of a dive in which the diver exits
on the same path as the entry shows a symmetrical series
of changes in depth as the diver exits, SO it is possible to
pinpoint the time at which the diver turned around and
began the exit. In this case, Rorex turned the dive after be-
ing stopped at a constant depth for approximately 11-12
minutes. This time at a constant depth suggests that some
sort of activity may have held him in one place-includ-
ing a possible entrapment. If Rorex were entrapped, the in-
creased workload of freeing himself could have increased
his breathing rate substantially and caused him to use an
excessive amount of air.
To check this entrapment theory, on the day after the
fatality, Sorenson searched the most likely locations for an
entrapment. Hole in the Wall Cave does not typically have
strong flow, SO a major silt disturbance would linger, and
there would be signs of a struggle on the floor. Sorenson
saw no sign of disturbances.
1. Forrest Wilson, email communication, 9 July 2020.
2. Deborah Buckhalter, "Merritt's Mill Pond cave diver identified;
death deemed accidental drowning," www.dothaneagle.com, 9
July 2020.
3. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 21 Dec. 2020.

---------- Page 32 ----------
2020 Caving-Related Accidents and Incidents
This lucky duck was rescued from a sinkhole by Tony
Schmitt and Dan Lamping. Photo by Dan Lamping.


********** 28 January 2020
unnamed sinkhole, Illinois
pet duck fell into sinkhole
Landowners in Monroe County, Illinois, began reach-
ing out to caving organizations after their pet duck fell into
a newly opened sinkhole on their property. The president
of the Illinois Speleological Survey contacted Tony Schmitt
and Dan Lamping to see if they could assist. Schmitt was
familiar with the area, as he had looked for caves nearby.
Schmitt and Lamping met with the duck owners that eve-
ning.
The sinkhole, which had formed at the edge of a sink-
hole pond, was barely wide enough for human entry. The
hole was entirely in soil and about 15 feet deep. The cavers
rigged to a tree and placed a board at the lip to keep the
rope from cutting into the soil. Schmitt carefully descended,
knowing that there was a potential for the soil to collapse
around him. When he located the duck, Lamping dropped
a sack down to him, and he placed the duck in the bag.
Schmitt then carefully climbed out and returned the duck
to its grateful owners.
After the successful rescue, the landowners took the
cavers on a tour of their property and showed them other
sinkholes, although none of them turned out to be caves.
1. Daniel Lamping, Incident Report, 24 March 2020.
Comments: Helping with animal rescue is a great ex-
ample of how cavers can be good neighbors, form lasting
relationships with landowners, and truly become part of
the karst country community.
Tony Schmitt ascends an incredibly tight sinkhole while
rescuing a pet duck. Photo by Dan Lamping.


********** 23 February 2020
Buzzmans Cave, Indiana
dog stranded in cave
A champion coon hound named BuzzMan went miss-
ing during a sanctioned hunt. The dog was wearing a GPS
tracking collar that stopped tracking at the entrance of a
cave. The Indiana Conservation office called local cavers,
who dug into a tight stream passage. After two attempts,
BuzzMan was eventually located 600 feet into the cave in a
larger stream passage. The dog was reported to be cold and
hungry but otherwise unhurt.
1. Dustin Vogt, "Dog stuck in cave rescued in southern Indiana,"
www.kwtx.com 25 February 2020.
2. Digital Staff, "Dog rescued after getting stuck in Indiana cave,
www.wlwt.com, 25 February 2020.
3. Anmar Mirza, personal communication, 31 December 2020.
Comments: The cave was not accessible to humans un-
til cavers dug it open. The cave was named in BuzzMan's
honor.


********** 7 May 2020
unspecified sea cave, California
trapped in sea cave
On the evening of 7 May 2020, a couple was rescued
near the Ritz-Carlton hotel in Half Moon Bay, California,
between Miramontes Point's 60-foot bluffs and Three Rocks
Beach. The couple was most likely either at Drippy Grotto
or Osprey Grotto, both of which are easily accessible from
the beach below the hotel during low tide. The tide had

---------- Page 33 ----------
been low during the day, but had risen five feet, trapping
the visitors in the cave. The couple called 911 as the tide
trapped them in the cave. At 9:15 p.m., a California High-
way Patrol helicopter and the Pillar Point Harbor Master
rescue vessel arrived to provide lights and safety for a res-
cue swimmer. Coastside Fire Protection firefighters set up a
rope system, and the rescue swimmer used a paddle board
to bring each person safely back to the beach. The individu-
als were medically evaluated by the paramedics and fire-
fighters and sustained no injuries.
1. Bay City News, "People trapped in beach cave below Ritz-
Carlton in Half Moon Bay: The tide came in, and the beach disap-
peared," www.newsbreak.com, 8 May 2020.
2. Bruce Rogers, personal communication, 10 January 2021.
Comments: Knowing and abiding by publicly avail-
able tidal forecasts is a best practice for exploring sea caves.
Many sea caves are safe and accessible only in the few hours
around low tide.
Sea caves at Half Moon Bay, California. At low tide they're accessible
from the beach but the unwary can be trapped by the rising tide. Photo
by the California Coastal Record Project.


********** 11 July 2020
ridgewalking, Pennsylvania
exhaustion, aid, no injury
After a day of ridgewalking with other cavers, a 31-year-
old woman began showing signs of dehydration and pos-
sible heat exhaustion. The day was warm with relative hu-
midity near 95%. When the cavers reached their vehicles,
the woman drank some water and immediately began vom-
iting. Bouts of vomiting continued for almost 30 minutes,
and her condition progressed to severe headaches, confu-
sion, and eventually difficulty maintaining consciousness.
The cavers began driving until they had cell phone re-
ception and called 911. They arranged to meet emergency
personnel in the parking lot of a Dollar General store. While
they waited, the cavers applied ice bags to the woman's
body. After being transported to an emergency room, she
received fluids through an IV and was discharged four
hours later.
1. Ryan Maurer, Incident Report, 14 July 2020.
Comments: In his report, the trip leader says that this is
a good reminder to maintain awareness of the health con-
dition of team members and their fluid intake in order to
prevent incidents like this.


********** 25 August 2020
Sharps Cave, West Virginia
lost car keys
Two experienced cavers and two new cavers arrived at
Sharps Cave in Pocahontas County, West Virginia. As the
cavers were putting on their gear, there was some discus-
sion about what to do with their car keys. Normally, the
cavers would hide the keys somewhere on the vehicle, but
since the parking area is near a highway, they decided that
the vehicle owner would keep the keys in his cave pack.
Shortly after entering the cave, the two new cavers de-
cided that they did not care for this particular activity, and
the group exited the cave after about 45 minutes. Upon re-
turning to the vehicle, the cavers discovered that the exter-
nal pocket of the cave pack where the keys had been placed
had a large hole in it, and the car keys were missing.
The group searched the weedy, overgrown path to the
cave but did not find the keys. The vehicle's owner retraced
the group's route in the first section of cave but returned to
say he didn't find the keys. The other caver then offered to
go back into the cave and retrace the entire route. The two
cavers made it to the point where the group had initially
turned around without locating the keys, but thankfully,
they found the keys on their way out. They reported going
from "totally bummed to elated in that one second."
1. Mark Hodge, email communication, 25 August 2020.
Comments: There really is no standard protocol for
what to do with car keys while caving; it depends on each
particular caving and surface security situation. Cavers
should be aware that hard items like keys in external pock-
ets or against the pack walls on the inside can quickly lead
to holes worn through even the toughest pack materials.

---------- Page 34 ----------
Getting Back to Caving after COVID-or Any Long Absence from the Underground
Gretchen Baker, NSS 50323
Last September, I went on a cave trip
clothing and heavy packs. After a few days
that ended up being 18 hours long. The
they get acclimated, but it's rough at first.
trip kicked my butt. It didn't need to be
that long. It was that long because I was
Your Gear
out of caving shape. Although I had done
When you last put away your cave
an eight-hour cave trip the month before,
gear, was it clean? Or were you thinking
that had been the longest trip in many
you'd go on one more trip and then forgot
months. I had been doing a lot of running
about it? Where is it now? Is it in a pile
and hiking beforehand, but those activities
somewhere, caked in dried mud, crinkled,
had exercised just my legs and not the rest
and moldy? Or have you used your cave
of my body. I was not prepared for all of
gear for other purposes and now it's
the climbing, squeezing, lifting my pack,
scattered?
wading against water, and other move-
Is your life-protecting gear (helmet,
ments a cave throws at you. I was not only
harness, webbing ropes, and soft parts of
embarrassed at how difficult it seemed, but
your vertical system) more than 10 years
also upset with myself. Ineeded to improve
old? If so, it's time to replace them. Have
my physical conditioning if I wanted to
the soles of your shoes oxidized and hard-
be caving at my former skill level. I also
ened? Have your batteries leaked or been
realized that I needed to up my mental
discharged SO long that they won't hold a
game. I didn't remember landmarks like
charge? It's time to take out all your gear
I should have. I made wrong turns. I felt
and carefully assess it.
like a newbie.
I'm sharing this because I know many
Your Mind
cavers have taken breaks from going under-
Your mind is complex, and it might be
ground. What's the longest time that you've
the most important thing that you prepare
taken off from caving? Maybe you took time
to go caving.
off due to a new job, an injury, distance from
caves, pregnancy, a new baby, or COVID-
Skill Fade
19. Whatever the reason, when you are
How long does it take for you to forget
ready for a cave trip, are you really ready?
certain caving skills? Can you still don your
Here are a few items to consider:
vertical gear and do a changeover in just
a few minutes? Can you rig a pit without
Your Body
retying the knot a couple of times?
Have you put on a few pounds or lost
While parts of caving are like riding
muscle tone during the pandemic or your
a bike in that you never forget them, some
break from caving? Do you still fit in your
skills need to be practiced. These may not
cave suit and harness? Are you flexible
be the same skills for each person. While
enough to perform stemming or climbing
one person may remember every single
skills like you did before?
knot and how much rope is needed to tie
Learn from my lesson. Be physically
it, another may need several tries or even
prepared for your caving trip. That means
some instruction on how to tie something
doing exercises that simulate what caving
that they once knew well.
will be like, such as core exercises, pushups,
Skills that are most likely to fade or
pullups, weightlifting, balance moves, and
get rusty are the ones that require a strict
so on. You may need to up your cardio
attention to steps, like pickoffs. If you have
game. And when you start caving again,
gained or lost weight during the pandemic,
it may be wise to start with an easy or
you may need to adjust to a new center of
moderate cave trip. When you were caving
balance for certain maneuvers. Practicing
frequently before COVID-19, caving may
in a controlled environment before you go
have seemed routine, and a particular
underground is ideal.
climb in a cave before the pandemic may
have seemed quite simple. Is it still simple
Risk Tolerance
if you haven't been climbing or using those
Throughout the pandemic we were
muscles?
advised to "recreate responsibly." We
If you were accustomed to cold, uncom-
didn't want to be the patient in a search
fortable conditions before the pandemic,
and rescue operation that put the rescuers
but have been working from home in your
at additional risk.
climate-controlled house, will your body be
Now that the pandemic is easing, has
able to adapt as easily? This is a problem for
your risk tolerance changed? Risk tolerance
some wildland firefighters as they start the
in the outdoors is defined as the amount
wildland firefighting season with protective
of risk you are willing to take. Have you
Are you ready for this crawl after a long hiatus
from caving? Photo by Gretchen Baker.
gotten SO tired of being isolated that you
are now willing to take more risks? Or
has constantly assessing how likely you
might be to catch the virus made you more
risk averse? Understanding how you feel
about risk may help you to consider your
decisions.
Heuristic Traps
Every day we make hundreds of
decisions: what to wear, what to eat, what
to buy. For many of these decisions, we
don't review relevant information, weigh
alternatives, and then decide. Instead, we
use simple rules of thumb, or heuristics.
These mental shortcuts use only one or
two pieces of evidence. Although the result
might not be perfect, it works well enough
that we use heuristics frequently and often
unconsciously.
However, heuristics may not be the
best way to make decisions in high-risk
situations. We may need to be more acutely
tuned into more cues in order to have a
good outcome. When we base our decision-
making on just one factor, we may be falling
into what is called a heuristic trap. This idea
was developed for backcountry ski travel
and avalanche safety (McCammon 2002).
Here I adapt these heuristic traps to the
caving environment.
Familiarity: You've done something
before or seen it done, and it didn't seem
too bad. You don't think it's a big deal. But
something may have changed, and now one
little mistake can cause a cascade of errors.
For example, maybe you've rigged off this
boulder before, and you think that because
it has always worked before it will work
again. You don't take the time to assess
whether a recent storm has disrupted the
ground underneath it. Or consider the case
of the Thai cave rescue: the leader had gone
into the cave many times before and consid-

---------- Page 35 ----------
ered that it was safe. He wasn't expecting
Think about close calls, near misses,
big rains that would change the conditions
and accidents you've had over the years.
and cause the group to become trapped.
Identify human factors that influenced
Social proof: You saw a video or social
those incidents. Is there a theme through-
media post about someone else in this cave,
out these incidents? Perhaps one heuristic
SO that means you can do it. Plus, you want
trap is more prevalent than others. This
to show how cool you are, SO you're going to
might be your Achilles' heel. Are you so
explore the cave SO that you can post your
goal-oriented that you never stop until
proof of work on social media.
you reach the goal? Or are you the expert
Over-commitment to a goal: You and
and wear that halo, thinking that you can
your cave group planned to go to a certain
surmount any challenge the cave throws
part of the cave. Someone started feeling
at you, no matter the expertise of the rest
exhausted, or the stream started rising,
of your group?
but you decided to forge ahead anyway.
The goal has become SO important in your
Avoiding Heuristic Traps
mind that you won't deviate from it even
In order to avoid these heuristic traps,
if other conditions suggest that you need
there are a few things we can do: plan, use
to reassess.
situational awareness, review scenarios,
Expert halo: You tend to defer to the
and create a good culture for leaders to
expert in the group. Even if you're not sure
make better decisions by allowing the
that what the expert is proposing is a good
group to ask questions. Let's explore these
idea, you prefer not to question the expert's
options in a little more detail.
advice and be the one to rock the boat. Or
Plan: One of the ways to plan is to use
you may be the expert and be unwilling to
checklists. These have helped in numerous
listen to questions.
situations to make sure that everything
Scarcity: You have a limited opportu-
is covered. Do you have a gear checklist?
nity to make it happen. For example, you
Have you filled out a Caver Contact sheet
drove six hours to get to the cave. You're
with information for your surface watch?
Does your surface watch know who to call
going to do it no matter what. Or perhaps
you've traveled far within the cave to get to
if you don't come out on time?
a virgin cave passage. You want to survey
Use situational awareness: Another
it and put it on the map, even if you have
way to avoid heuristic traps is to assess
passed your turnaround time or you're
what the current conditions are and main-
feeling exhausted.
tain situational awareness. Each time you
go caving, even if you go to the same cave
How many of these traps have you
every week, you need to evaluate all the
fallen into? When I'm honest with myself,
factors at play. What's the weather? How is
I realize that at some point I've been in all
everyone in the caving group feeling? Have
of them. I've just been lucky that nothing
other people been in the cave recently?
went wrong. Fortunately, we can protect
Review scenarios: Reviewing scenar-
ourselves from these heuristic traps.
ios or asking what-if questions can help
you prepare for various possibilities on a
cave trip. What if someone gets sick? What
if the group splits up? What if a passage is
blocked? Reading American Caving Accidents
is a great way to play the what-if game.
Encourage and ask questions: Finally,
encourage questions, and do not be afraid
to speak up and ask questions if you aren't
clear on the plan or you see something that
is unsafe. Likely if you have a question,
someone else does, too.
Your Team
We don't cave alone, SO you need to
consider the body, gear, and mind of your
teammates. Are they also appropriately
ready? Have their personalities changed
during the lapse in caving? Are they able to
balance your personal challenges? It's good
to have a variety of mindsets with you on
your caving trip.
[have learned from my experience last
A wet alpine cave trip. Photo by Gretchen
September. On a cave trip I did this spring.
Baker.
I had been working out and was ready for
Checklist for Getting
Back into Caving
Improve your cardiovascular fitness
Do some weight lifting and/or push-
ups and pullups to improve your
strength
Stretch or do yoga a few times a week
to enhance flexibility
Pay attention to your nutrition;
eating well will help to give you
more stamina
Practice skills that you may be rusty
on before you go caving (such as
rigging, knot tying, bolting) in a
controlled environment (such as in
an outdoor SRT practice)
Ensure that you have all of your
necessary cave gear and that it is
clean
Replace needed parts (such as cave
gear that is worn out or soft parts and
helmets that are older than 10 years)
Check your cave lights and batteries
Make a checklist for your caving trip
Fill out a Caver Alert Information
Sheet (http://ncrc.info/Safety)
Practice situational awareness. A free
Mountain Rescue Association course
is available at https://mra.org/
Watch the "Virtual Topics in Cave
Rescue" series on the NSS Tube
channel (http://bit.ly/caverescuevi-
deos) to refresh your perspective on
caving safely
it. My teammates hadn't been in a cave for
almost a year and hadn't been exercising
their caving muscles. This particular cave
required a lot of crawling. I was raring to
go, but I had to remind myself not to be
over-committed to the goal. Taking our
time and enjoying the experience with
the group was more important. Talking to
them throughout the trip helped keep me
centered, and we had a good trip. The next
day I wasn't sore, but they were. It was their
turn to learn the lesson!
If you and your team are physically,
mentally, and emotionally ready for getting
back into caving, go have fun! It's been hard
for many of us to take a long break from
caving. We have many reasons for going
underground, and hopefully our break
from it has helped us to appreciate it even
more. Enjoy!
Reference
McCammon, I. (2004). Heuristic traps in recre-
ational avalanche accidents: Evidence and
implications. Avalanche News, 68(1), 42-50.

---------- Page 36 ----------
"Off Rope" Means a Lot More Than Just Off Rope
Andy Armstrong, NSS 45993 RL FE
The caver ascended smoothly and
instances, this experience helped me to form
slowly, focused and alert for any issues
an opinion that we as American cavers have
with the rope. Under tension from his
become dangerously lax in our on-rope/
body weight, the slender girth of the rope
off-rope safety protocols.
constricted to what seemed to be the diam-
Once I really started paying attention
eter of a shoestring. On the previous day,
to it, I noticed fall-zone safety problems on
the technical climbers on the expedition
almost every cave trip. I saw cavers walk
had finally reached the top of a 155-foot
all the way to the rope, or even clip into it,
dome after days of free-climbing and hand-
before calling Rope." Just as common
drilling. They rigged this brand-new 9-mm
is calling "Off Rope" before actually unclip-
rope for the rest of the team to ascend and
ping or walking away from the fall zone. It
survey whatever passage might lead from
is unfortunately a somewhat familiar occur-
the top of the dome. That night, the climb-
rence to reach the top of a pitch and find
ers had come back to camp with harrowing
the rope off the pad, in a crack, on a sharp
tales of sheath slippage on the new rope.
edge, rigged to a cross-loaded carabiner,
The caver was now frogging up this very
or in some otherwise non-ideal situation.
same rope to explore and survey whatever
Incidents that represent the potential
might be at the top. The thought of slipping
for an accident are commonly termed
a few inches at any moment did not help to
"near-misses." Much can be learned
alleviate the ever-present nerves brought on
by documenting and communicating
by climbing a skinny rope in the center of a
near-miss incidents. Incident analysis in
large, black space.
industrial settings shows us that for every
A few minutes earlier, the previous
fatality in a given environment, there are
caver up the rope (who just happened to be
around 400 near-miss incidents leading up
his significant other) had yelled "Off Rope!"
to it. Viewed from the opposite perspective,
loudly, signaling that all was ready. When
we can predict that for every accumulation
the caver finally neared the lip, he looked
of 400 near-misses in a particular environ-
up and saw that all was not, in fact, well.
ment, a fatality will result. Therefore, it is
He first saw the large PVC rope pad and
prudent to report, learn from, and prevent
immediately noticed that the thin rope was
near-miss incidents. Reducing their number
off to the side and not on the pad at all. In
through awareness and training will result
reality, the rope was laying over a rough
in fewer actual accidents over time.
rub point, presumably sawing up and down
Avoidable fall-zone near-miss inci-
throughout his entire eight-minute climb.
dents often result from one or more of these
The caver, moving even more smoothly and
contributing factors, which we will examine
cautiously, soon climbed past the rub point
in more depth below:
and breathed a sigh of relief when seeing
Loss of situational awareness result-
that the rope had not yet sustained much
ing in distraction from safety focus,
abrasion. He replaced it onto the rope pad
because of complacency, carelessness,
and continued to the top. Everyone came
fatigue, or fear-based instincts
out okay, but the incident was alarming and
A poor concept of Safety Zone -
caused a bit of-shall we say "intramarital
Danger Zone concepts and protocols due
friction" for the next few hours or SO.
to lack of common training, discipline, and
This is a true story that happened on
understanding
a prominent caving project just a few years
The common caving call of "Off (or
ago. I was the next person to go up the rope
On) Rope" actually means quite a bit more
after this rope-off-the-pad incident. The
than "I'm off (or On) the rope," and people
caving couple involved is fairly well-known
are misunderstanding the true significance
nationally. I count them among the safest,
of these terms.
most competent cavers I know and among
my very favorite people with which to
"Oh, I'm sorry, did I break your
explore and survey. This incident illustrates
concentration?" -Jules Winnfield, Pulp
that whether an expert or beginner vertical
Fiction
caver, it is unfortunately easy for any of us
It is well understood that vertical
to make common mistakes that can result
caving carries inherent risk. Safety must be
in a less safe vertical environment for our
our top priority in vertical environments.
teammates, even when those teammates
These ideas are not controversial, yet we
include great friends and loved ones. This
often find something else attempting to
incident reinforces what we all know: that
steal our attention away. Perhaps most
vigilance is key and that the devil is in the
simply, after dozens of uneventful caving
details for all of us. Along with many other
trips we may simply become acclimatized
to risk and omit safety checks or overlook
potential hazards like a cross-loaded cara-
biner. Some people just seem to be careless,
no matter their depth of training or experi-
ence. Everyone deserves a chance to learn,
and anyone can make a mistake. However,
when someone continually or repeatedly
causes safety problems, the team must take
corrective action.
Mistakes of all kinds are likely when
people are tired. When cavers are exhausted
at the top of a rope climb, they are likely to
leave behind sub-optimal conditions for
the next climber. Regularly checking on
team fitness is a wise practice to cultivate,
as fatigue in a vertical environment often
leads to problems. Rigging may be pulled
out of alignment by a caver's tethered pack
as they negotiate an obstacle. A tired caver
may inadvertently misalign the rigging and
then forget to look down and check before
continuing on.
Similarly, sometimes cavers experience
a "fright" or an unusual amount of stress
while ascending due to different environ-
mental factors. Like fatigue, this can lead
to an overwhelming desire to be off rope
and a speedy departure at the top, result-
ing in a failed safety check of conditions for
the next climber. What could cause such a
fright? There are many factors, including
potential or actual rockfall, rope sheath
problems, any kind of "pop," and SRT
system problems. It is possible that the
incident described in the beginning of this
article was caused by a sense of haste in
wanting to get off of a skinny rope that was
known to have sheath-slippage issues. A
similar sense of haste is imparted by fear of
not keeping up with the group. Promoting
a safety culture that says, "We're all in this
together," rather than, "You better keep
up," goes a long way toward preventing
distractions that can lead to trouble.
Whatever the trigger may be, the desire
to get off rope at the top of a harrowing
climb contributes to the large number
of problems and near misses that occur
between the top of a pitch and the first
rebelay or rub point. Within the vertical
environment, we must remain vigilant with
our safety focus, with our own personal
welfare and that of our teammates as the
priority.
"Highway to the Danger Zone" -
Kenny Loggins, Top Gun
There is no universal set of safety stan-
dards or source of training for American
cavers, which means that most of us learn
caving and vertical skills from various

---------- Page 37 ----------
Safety
DZ
Zone
ROLL-IN
ROLL-IN
ZONE
ZONE
Safety Zone
DZ
Diagram depicting Danger Zone and Safety Zone in a hypothetical vertical environment.
local teachers, books, websites, and online
Danger Zone (DZ) is our "Fall Zone" and
videos. Some of us may take a cave rescue
includes not only the pitch but also the area
or a vertical training course in another genre
immediately surrounding it, where falling
where we can pick up some good Single
objects may cause harm, such as the roll-in
Rope Technique (SRT) habits and compare
zone at the top and the ricochet zone at the
our gear to that of others from different
bottom. Although not always the case in the
regions. There is a wealth of good material
ricochet zone at the bottom, in general you
out there, but it is left to the new vertical
should be clipped into a rope any time you
caver to sort and prioritize the variety of
are in the DZ. The Safety Zone above and
often-contradictory information. There is
below the pitch includes everywhere else
no clear overarching safety ethic across
in the world where you do not need to be
various vertical environments, and regional
clipped into a rope-almost certainly but
variance runs the spectrum.
not necessarily including wherever you are
In 2018, I was fortunate to attend
right now reading this article.
a week-long cave rigging training in
In Hungary, new cave riggers are
Hungary titled the "Technical 2" or "T2."
taught to begin all rigging in the Safety
Developed for cavers that have graduated
Zone. This allows a danger-free situation
from Hungary's "Basic Caving" and "T1"
for tying knots, uncoiling rope, and SO on.
classes, the T2 training resembles a verti-
The caver then enters the Danger Zone after
cal caving boot camp, requiring 16 hours
clipping in to the rope. With apologies to
per day of mental and physical exertion.
Kenny Loggins, this approach line above
The experience reinforced my suspicion
the pitch becomes our "Nylon (or fiber of
that standardized training and standard-
your choice) Highway to the Danger Zone."
ized gear can lead to safety benefits and
When ascending up and out, the highway
self-rescue capabilities within a caving
should be taken all the way to an exit well
community.
within the Safety Zone-that is, the caver
One ethic of the Hungarians that
should remain clipped in to the rope until
particularly impressed me is the clear
they are well within the Safety Zone.
delineation of a Safety Zone and a Danger
On returning from Hungary, when I
Zone surrounding every vertical pitch. The
visited a few favorite local pits, I realized
that my habit was to begin rigging much
Safety
too close to or in some cases even within the
DZ. The familiar sight of someone begin-
Zone
ning their rigging at the edge of the DZ by
leaning up against and wrapping rope from
the "safe" side of a pit-edge tree now gives
me the willies. We must remember that
anywhere above the pit where something
or someone could fall in is included in the
DZ, and we need to be attached to rigging
before we enter this area.
Training for vertical cavers should
include a designated Safety Zone and
Danger Zone and should use common
verbal rope commands including "On
Rope," "ROCK," and so on beginning in
a controlled above-ground environment.
This attention to detail within the safety
of a controlled training environment will
help newer vertical cavers to form habits
that will then become second nature upon
approaching a real DZ.
Safety
Zone
"You keep using that word. I do not
think it means what you think it means."
-Inigo Montoya, The Princess Bride
Let's face it: we say "Off Rope" soon
after detaching from the rope, but we
really need it to mean a lot more than that.
Perhaps we can forgive our newer caving
partners for being in information overload
and sometimes reverting to the literal mean-
ing of the words. This is most certainly
what is happening in the Pavlovian brain
when the sound of a descender detaching
from the rope at the bottom of a pit causes
a caver to proudly announce "Off Rope!"
while nowhere near to being clear of the
Danger Zone.
We need to do a better job of explaining
to newer cavers that while we use the terms
"On Rope" and "Off Rope," what we are
really announcing is our respective entry
or exit from the Danger Zone. Let's look at
each term individually.
"On Rope!" The point of this call is
to inform others that you will be occu-
pying the Danger Zone and that they
should refrain from throwing or dropping
anything into the DZ while you are in it.
Although necessary only if other cavers
are ahead of you, it is traditionally shouted
into the void regardless, especially when
unsure if others could be within earshot.
"On Rope!" is a signal to all that someone
has entered the DZ and that everyone must
be vigilant (and ideally quiet and listening)
until the DZ is free. The term "On Rope" is
preferable to "On rappel" or "Rappelling"
because it covers more situations and can
be called from the Safety Zone before clip-
ping in.
A caver approaching a pitch should
yell "On Rope" as a way of asking permis-
sion to enter the Danger Zone. In response,

---------- Page 38 ----------
the caver will hear silence, "No!" or "OK!"
and hit you. When rappelling, you should
Silence usually means that no one is there
take care to place the rope onto rope pads
and it is okay to enter the DZ. However,
and away from sharp edges, but anything
this is not always true, and cavers should
you miss on the way down can usually be
continue to remain vigilant for any sign of
remedied by the next caver.
an occupied DZ. "No!" means that the caver
When you call Rope" at the top of
does not have permission to enter, because
a pitch, you are informing everyone below
someone else is there. And finally, "OK" is
you that you are fully clear of the Danger
a friendly acknowledgement that the rope
Zone. When exiting the DZ at the top of a
call was heard and that it is ok for the caver
pitch, a caver needs to ensure not only that
to enter the DZ as requested.
they have fully exited but also that they
The call of "OK" is not always neces-
have visually checked the condition of
sary. For instance, if you are ready to enter
the rigging for the next caver coming up.
the DZ from the bottom and the person
Visually inspecting the rigging should be
climbing calls "Off Rope" at the top, you
done continually by each caver on the way
may immediately call "On Rope" and enter
up to ensure that they are never leaving a
the DZ without needing to respond "OK."
less-safe condition for the following caver.
However, if you are not quite ready to
When passing a rebelay, redirect, or rope
climb, then you may want to reply "OK"
pad, the ascending caver should pause and
back to the top SO there is mutual under-
look down to make sure all is well. If the
standing that the DZ is clear.
rope for the next caver is on a sharp obstacle
"Off Rope!" This call allows cavers
or is hanging from a cross-loaded carabiner,
following to know that you are clear of the
we have an obligation to fix it for our team-
DZ. It means much more than that you have
mates before continuing up. Only when the
simply detached from the rope.
nylon highway is safe and ready for the next
When you call "Off Rope" at the
traveler should we call "Off Rope."
bottom of a pitch, you are informing
"On Rope" and Rope" carry the
everyone at the top that you have both
additional risk of being confused for one
detached from the rope and fully exited
another. Some caving cultures use "Rope
the DZ. Ideally, when you call Rope,"
Free" instead of "Off Rope" SO that it is
you should be in a place where something
more easily distinguished from "On Rope"
dropped into the pit could never bounce
in noisy pits. This is an easy habit to adopt,
National Coordinator of the NCRC
Anmar Mirza, NSS 45765, and Gretchen Baker, NSS 50323
Coordinator, Gretchen Baker, who will
introduce herself and talk about her vision
of where she wants to take the NCRC as she
assumes leadership.
Most cavers have heard of the NCRC.
The NCRC is a Commission of the National
Speleological Society and reports to the
Administrative Vice-President (AVP)
through the Education Division. Many
cavers have taken training through the
NCRC, and the NCRC is often a visible
public presence during major rescues. The
Commission conducts a lot of training,
which is the most frequent reason that
the caving community interacts with the
NCRC. Aside from training though, the
Outgoing NCRC Coordinator Anmar Mirza
NCRC also has several important tasks.
Hi there, my name is Anmar Mirza,
Among them are acting as the "voice" for
and until recently I was the National
cave rescue for the NSS, interacting with the
Coordinator for the National Cave Rescue
various agencies that have responsibility for
Commission (NCRC). I served as the
cave rescue, and maintaining the special-
National Coordinator for the last 12 years.
ized equipment and lists of trained people
In this article I want to give an overview of
that might be needed for cave rescue.
what NCRC is and what it does. In addi-
The NCRC is run by a Board of Regional
tion, I'd like to talk a little about what I have
Coordinators. The country is broken up into
done during my tenure and how NCRC
regions, each with a Regional Coordinator
has developed during that time. I will then
who is the first point of contact for cavers
turn over this article to our new National
and agencies in those areas. Additionally,
and some American cavers have started to
use it for greater clarity.
Regardless which terminology you
prefer, let's make sure that when we call
Rope" at the top of a pitch, the caver at
the bottom knows and trusts that what we
are really communicating is the following:
I have detached from the rope and
have fully exited the Danger Zone. I have
checked all the rigging both before and
after I used it and have made sure that
everything is safe for your use, includ-
ing carabiner loading and locking. I have
double-checked to ensure that the rope is
on all rope pads, off of all sharp edges, and
hanging free from snags and ledges. The
rope is safe and ready for you to ascend!
This is a lot of information to expect
two words to convey. Let's ensure that
newer cavers understand the significance of
these words and the level of responsibility
they are intended to carry. Likewise, let's
make sure that our veteran cavers have not
become complacent with old bad habits.
"Off Rope" means a lot more than just
off rope!
This article benefits greatly from the
thoughtful review and comments of: Caroline
Bull, András Hegedüs, Scott McCrea, Sarah
Richards, and one anonymous reviewer.
NCRC has a National Coordinator, Training
Coordinator, Medical Coordinator, and
Diving Coordinator. NCRC does not
deal with cave diving per se, but it has an
interface with that community through
the Diving Coordinator. NCRC is not a
membership organization, and the only
people who are NCRC members are the
Coordinators.
Cave rescue is unique among the vari-
ous forms of rescue. The environment is a
highly specialized one. The more serious
rescues require people who are extremely
comfortable and capable operating in the
cave environment for time periods that
can greatly exceed what is typical in emer-
gency services. This means that most major
cave rescues have to have significant caver
involvement, and many are performed
primarily by cavers. As a community,
cavers are one of the few that by and large
self-rescue. Since the inception of the NCRC
in 1975, many thousands of cavers have
been trained in rescue, and there have
been hundreds of cavers that have directly
benefited from the training that the NCRC
has provided.
Currently the NCRC offers a wide vari-

---------- Page 39 ----------
ety of training to meet the varied needs of
Certain places in the country are cave-
the caving community, from learning how
dense and have a high population with
to be a safer caver to taking care of minor
easy access to those caves, thus the need
problems that may occur to conducting
for rescue is relatively high. I say relatively
a large-scale rescue. Everyone involved
because on the whole, cave rescues are
with NCRC is a volunteer, which helps to
not common compared to other types of
keep the cost to the students for training
emergency response. Car accidents or fires
very low compared to almost every other
happen every day in a given area, but a
similar form of training. It is the dedication
county might go years between the need
of our volunteers that has allowed us to
for a cave rescue, so local agencies are
offer such a stunning array of training to
often unprepared. There are a few hotspots
fit almost every need. The NCRC Training
where cave rescue needs are much greater,
Coordinator, currently Dr. Roger Mortimer,
and the local caving community develops
leads an Education Committee tasked with
experience in responding. Southern Indiana
developing the curriculum that we teach.
(where I live) was seeing a rescue a month
What exactly are those courses? Let's take
or more from the 70s through the early
a look!
2000s. This is similar in the TAG area and
some places in the Eastern Region.
Weeklong training:
This pace has slowed in recent years
Level 1 is designed to develop team
as cave access has been restricted and
membership skills as well as introduc-
the number of people exploring caves
ing students to a wide variety of cave
has declined. Equally important though,
rescue skills.
new cavers are getting better training at
Level 2 develops more advanced
basic caving techniques (thanks to NSS
rescue skills and team leadership.
outreach!), and more of them are getting
TOFE (Technical Operations and Field
trained at basic rescue, SO problems that
Exercises) is available after students
might have required a callout a few decades
have completed Level 2 or 3 and
ago are being avoided or are being taken
is focused on field exercises with a
care of by the caving group itself. Caving is
minimum of classroom time.
safer than it ever has been on a per-person-
Level 3 develops highly technical
hour basis, and NCRC has a large share of
rescue skills and rescue management
the responsibility for that! Aside from the
skills.
benefit of people being safer, the impact to
IQ (Instructor Qualification) is train-
caves and landowner relationships is less.
ing for new instructors and is by
My first cave rescue experience was
invitation only after students have
when I was 14, and by the time I was old
completed levels 1, 2, and 3.
enough to take my first NCRC training
at age 18 in 1988, I'd been on several cave
Other training:
rescues. One of my first caves was Buckner
Orientation to Cave Rescue (OCR).
Cave in Monroe County, Indiana, (now
2-3 days. This weekend class is a
an NSS Preserve where I am the Preserve
basic introduction to rescue and is
Manager) and I was (and still am) caving
NCRC's most popular offering. Every
there weekly, as were several hundred
year NCRC teaches numerous OCRs
people. About once every month or two,
around the country.
someone would get lost, and we'd have to
ICEE (In Cave Emergency Exercises).
go find them; about once a year there would
2-3 days. This class is taught entirely
be a more serious problem requiring rescue.
inside the cave and includes camp-
In my early days of cave rescue, Don
ing and how to emergency bivouac.
Paquette was the National Coordinator
NCRC offers two ICEE options; one
for the NCRC and lived in Bloomington,
requires vertical skills, and the other
Indiana, where I was located. He took
does not. This class is geared toward
me under his wing and mentored me. As
the average caver who wants to be
soon as I turned 18 in 1987, I became an
prepared but may not want to be
Emergency Medical Technician and started
involved in organized rescue.
learning wilderness emergency medicine.
SPAR (Small Party Assisted Rescue).
I quickly started helping to teach OCRs in
3-7 days. This is a highly customiz-
the Central Region, traveling all over with
able class aimed primarily toward
the Central Region cadre several times a
expedition cavers who may have to
year to teach OCRs. By the time I took my
self-rescue using minimal equipment
first week-long training in 1992, I'd helped
or help.
teach about a dozen OCRs. It took me a few
Other. The NCRC can customize
years to attend my first weeklong training
training to meet the needs of cavers,
because I had no free cash at that time in
caving groups, and agencies.
my life and the cost of the seminars was still
too much for me. More on how that affected
my outlook in a bit.
In 1995 I became an NCRC instructor,
and in 1999 I became the Central Region
Coordinator. Then in 2009 I became the
National Coordinator. I also served as the
NSS Safety and Techniques Committee
Chair for a few years. During my tenure I
have been active in continuously improving
and innovating cave rescue in general and
the NCRC specifically. When I first started,
many of the Regional Coordinators were
people that few in the caving community
knew, and many of them were people whose
only caving experience was at NCRC. I
worked very hard to bring people from
the caving community into the Regional
Coordinator and instructor roles, and today
every single Regional Coordinator is some-
one who is part of the caving community.
To date, Ihave taught at approximately
140 seminars, including every national
weeklong since my first as a student in 1992
as well as numerous regional weeklongs
around the country. I also have been on
about the same number of actual rescues,
including some serious ones. I'm a project
caver and have averaged a couple of cave
trips a week since I started caving. The
changes in curriculum that I have brought
to NCRC have been informed by real-world
experiences from that caving experience
and those rescues blended with my profes-
sional experience in emergency services,
including wilderness search and rescue and
disaster response.
My teaching experience with NCRC
led to me finding my passion for teaching,
which is part of what I have done profes-
sionally for about the last decade. NCRC's
instructor training is top notch, comparable
to or better than what is often found in the
professional world for the same amount of
time invested.
Most current NCRC instructors and
Regional Coordinators were students of
mine at some point. I work hard to cultivate
our newer students who show potential
for being able to teach and contribute, and
I am proud to call many of them friends
as they've risen through the ranks. NCRC
instructors are among the most dedicated
and professional of any I have ever had the
privilege to work with. It may seem cliché to
say that, but I mean it without reservation.
In my professional life, I often hold up the
NCRC as the standard.
Though NCRC training is inexpensive
(thank you volunteers!) by professional
standards, it can be cost-prohibitive to
our younger cavers who are most often in
the position to be able to take the time to
attend our seminars, as they have time, but
not money. Our more active, experienced
cavers may not have either time or money.
Many years ago, I was involved in the

---------- Page 40 ----------
rescue of a caver from a cave in Kentucky.
as an Education Committee member and
We had gotten called when the local rescue
as the Western Region Coordinator. I had
team decided that the rescue was too diffi-
served four terms as National Coordinator
cult, SO I mobilized many of the experienced
and said I would not run again. We had
cavers we'd been training in the region, and
two very excellent candidates who stepped
we were able to successfully evacuate the
forward, and the decision between them
caver from a difficult cave. When I talked
was not an easy one. I think having two
with the caver after he'd gotten out of the
highly qualified candidates is a good prob-
hospital, I told him about NCRC and that
lem to have! I felt comfortable turning over
the reason his rescue was successful was
the National Coordinator position to either
that most of the people who had performed
of them, and Gretchen was elected. Over
his rescue had NCRC training. He and I
the last few weeks, I have been helping
talked about how he could give back to
Gretchen to transition into her new role,
the caving community, and we explored
and she's already bringing new life and
the idea of him setting up a Cave Rescue
new perspectives. She has my full support
Training Fund to give scholarships to
and confidence. Gretchen, over to you now!
people who are seeking NCRC training.
The Cave Rescue Training Fund is
managed by the NSS, with a rotating
committee of NCRC-involved people who
award the scholarships. The seed money
was provided by the rescued caver who
set it up, and it has collected donations
along the way. The scholarships are mostly
awarded out of the interest the fund makes.
The scholarship award can dip into princi-
pal if the markets are not great in any given
year, but cannot exceed 5% of the fund
and to date has not awarded scholarships
out of the fund's principal. It is now an
endowed fund managed by the National
Speleological Foundation, thanks to a very
generous donation by a long-time caver and
former NCRC instructor. This scholarship
can pay for half of a person's registration
for a seminar, and we are now able to award
8-10 scholarships a year.
Another project I took on was the
Incoming NCRC Coordinator Gretchen Baker
publication of the new Manual of us Cave
Rescue Techniques. The second edition of
New National Coordinator
the original manual was last published
Thanks, Anmar! I am honored to have
in 1988 and was wildly out of date. In the
been chosen by the Board of Regional
mid-2000s I took over the project, which had
Coordinators (BORC) of the NCRC for
been languishing. With the help of several
this position. I look forward to serving the
people, we fleshed out the chapters and
organization and moving it forward.
started publishing it in binder format for
Here's a little about me: My name is
our classes. In 2015, with the help of a large
Gretchen Baker, and I love caves! From the
number of people, we were able to publish
time started caving during college at Jewel
a professional bound manual. We have a
Cave in South Dakota until now, I look for
commitment to updating the manual every
excuses to go underground. My current
three years, and I have remained the editor
job, as ecologist and cave specialist at Great
of the manual. We are now working on the
Basin National Park, lets me go under-
third revision, which will have a new look
ground frequently for my job. I also head
and new content.
into caves during my free time. I particu-
I've done a lot more in my tenure,
larly like cave science and exploration. One
but I wanted to hit some of the highlights.
year I caved from the near-sea level caves of
What I would like to do now is introduce
Quintana Roo, Mexico, spending hours in
Gretchen Baker, who was elected the new
water sketching well-decorated passage to
National Coordinator in February, 2021. I
the top of Mt. Rainier, where I had helped
first met Gretchen when she went to Indiana
carry scientific gear to explore and study the
University as a graduate student in the
glacier fumarole caves that top the volcano,
90s and she started caving with and then
including the highest elevation cave lake in
became an officer of the IU Caving Club.
North America.
Gretchen moved up through NCRC train-
I started cave rescue training when
ing to become an instructor. She has served
I was in graduate school in Indiana, and
haven't looked back. I became an NCRC
instructor in 2005 and have traveled to
many states and Canada to teach. I remem-
ber that the first NCRC event that I taught
at after my IQ class was in Puerto Rico, and
I missed my first wedding anniversary.
Fortunately, my husband has been very
supportive of me traveling and teaching,
and while I'm gone, he takes over all the
family duties, including care of our two
kids and various pets.
I helped with curriculum when I
joined the Education Committee and then
moved to the Western Region Coordinator
position, where I worked to strengthen the
Western Region program. I was asked by
some instructors to run for the National
Coordinator position. It was a daunting
thought, as I knew Anmar put a lot of time
into it and there were some difficult tasks
ahead. After talking with my husband and
other instructors, I decided to put in my
name. When I wrote my letter of intent,
I shared my vision for the organization,
and I'd like to share a condensed version
of that here.
The Future
As National Coordinator, during the
next three years there are three things I
want to particularly focus on: the NCRC
Instructor Team, improving communica-
tions, and encouraging cross-training.
Our Instructor Team is the key to
a successful NCRC. We have SO many
talented instructors, and I want to make
sure that we are acknowledging the time
and effort that they are putting in to teach
the best that they can. We will be starting to
track how long instructors have been teach-
ing SO we can recognize them at milestones.
We also will be looking for opportunities for
instructors to do some bonding, such as on
caving and canyoneering trips.
One way you can help is if you've taken
an NCRC class, send a note to an instructor
(or to me, and I can pass it on) letting them
know what you remember from the class
or something useful you've used from the
class. I can't tell you how good I felt when
I heard a former student talk about the
hypothermia kit he had learned about in an
OCR and how it saved his life when he got
hurt in a cave. Getting that feedback makes
it all worth it.
Communications are the key to every-
thing. Within NCRC, we are going to be
having more frequent instructor meet-
ings via Zoom to keep everyone up to
date. We're also working on updating the
NCRC website, posting more on the NCRC
Facebook page, and keeping up communi-
cations with partners.
Cross-training can come in a couple
different forms. For NCRC, we teach cave

---------- Page 41 ----------
rescue with an American twist. We often
training on hold, but we expect to see more
use micro-racks and prussiks. We customize
training courses offered soon.
our vertical systems; in fact, the only time
The national weeklong seminar is
I saw a class with more than one person
scheduled for August 27-September 4,
having exactly the same vertical system was
2021 near Albany, New York. This is an
in Canada. Taking classes about cave rescue
opportunity to take one of several weeklong
in other countries can show us additional
classes. Likely, there will be a couple of
and different techniques. Learning about
regional weeklong trainings in fall 2021 and
other rope disciplines, such as canyoneer-
at least one in the winter of 2022. In addi-
ing, climbing, mountaineering, arborist,
tion, we're anticipating several OCRs and
the Society of Professional Rope Access
SPARs, but we do not have specific dates
Technicians (SPRAT), and more, can help us
yet. If you are interested, keep an eye on
to learn other ways to use ropes. Not all of it
the NCRC website at ncrc.info, or contact
will be applicable to caving, but it can help
your regional coordinator (listed on the
us to think more objectively about what
NCRC website).
will work best for cave rescue in our areas.
If you can't wait for training, here are
encourage this cross-training not only for
a few other things you can do:
NCRC instructors, but for all cavers. It's
Check out the "Virtual Topics in Cave
always nice to have a few additional tools
Rescue" series on the NSS You Tube channel
in the tool box.
(http://bit.ly/caverescuevideos).
Take a wilderness first aid (WFA),
Upcoming Training
wilderness first responder (WFR), or emer-
The most frequent question I get is
gency medical technician (EMT) class. We
about training. The pandemic has put most
always need more medically trained people
A Framework for Search and Rescue Team Culture Using Mission Command Philosophy
Christian Stenner NSS 61663
A rescue operation in a cave is a diffi-
plateau was cut off from communications
cult and dynamic situation characterized
from the command post due to failure of
by obstacles and logistical challenges that
the required radio repeaters. The incident
do not exist in other forms of search and
command team had dispatched more than
rescue (SAR) operations. The underground
100 cavers and rescuers to the mountain
environment has inherent challenges that
only to spend the next few days wonder-
are obstacles to timely command, commu-
ing if the rescue was even happening at
nications, and decision making. A dynamic
all. Cavers, understanding the intent of the
environment demands agility and adapt-
exercise, executed the required operations
ability to achieve success. The strategic
without further direction and took initia-
military philosophy of Mission Command
tive to self-organize to the tasks at hand
is a worthwhile organizational tactic for
without waiting for reassignment. This
achieving success in situations with uncer-
was a command-and-control nightmare for
tainty. This article presents a brief overview
the planning and command teams, but the
of Mission Command and how it may inte-
rescue exercise was completed.
grate into rescue organizations. Elements
Similarities have been observed in
of Mission Command have shown success
other incidents over time, especially in the
in enhancing command and control which
initial stages of an incident where commu-
may be beneficial to cave rescue and regular
nication networks such as cave radios were
SAR operations.
yet to be put in place. The rescuers, having
During a number of challenging cave
an understanding of the implicit task and
rescue incidents and exercises, command
the required safety parameters under which
and control difficulties were encoun-
to operate, were able to take advantage of
tered and successfully overcome. These
opportunities without further direction.
instances were the basis of realizing that
Decision making was decentralized, and
some elements of the Mission Command
team leaders closer to the action felt they
philosophy were already being practiced
were able to assess and make quick deci-
inadvertently by our cave rescue team
sions when necessary.
and that exploring it further could yield
Mission Command combines central-
benefits.
ized command intent with decentralized
For example, a three-day cave rescue
execution, and empowers subordinate
exercise in the Canadian Rocky Mountains
initiative and decision making, within
provided a great example of how Mission
defined constraints (U.S. Army, 2019).
Command can benefit cave rescue opera-
Originating in Prussian armies of the 1800s,
tions. In this case, the remote mountain
Mission Command has been adapted and
National NCRC Coordinators
1975-1979 Dan Smith
1980-1982 Lee Noon
1983-1984 Tom Vines
1985-1991 Don Paquette
1991-1994 Steve Hudson
1994-1999 Bernard "Butch"
Feldhaus
1999-2009 John Punches
2009-2021 Anmar Mirza
2021-present Gretchen Baker
on cave rescues; plus this kind of knowl-
edge helps to keep you and the people you
cave with safer.
Check out the free Incident Command
System (ICS) classes on the FEMA website:
https://training.fema.gov/nims/
I appreciate this opportunity to intro-
duce myself. If you have any questions,
please contact me at GretchenBaker@caves.
org.
modified and is now practiced in the mili-
taries of the United States, Canada, and
other nations (Shamir, 2011). German tacti-
cian von Moltke wrote the following about
Augtragstaktik (mission tactics) which
summed up a major part of the philoso-
phy: "A favorable situation will never be
exploited if commanders wait for orders.
The highest commander and the youngest
soldier must be conscious of the fact that
omission and inactivity are worse than
resorting to the wrong expedient" (Storr,
2003; Dupuy, 1977). Subordinates are given
clearly defined goals, their commanders'
intent, their missions, and the context of
those missions (U.S. Army, 2019). They then
decide within their delegated freedom of
action how best to achieve their missions.
Orders focus on providing intent, control
measures, and objectives, allowing for
greater freedom of action by subordinate
commanders (Stewart, 2010).
The strategy has been further devel-
oped, and the key principles of the strategy
are described by the U.S. Army (2019) as
follows:
Competence
Build cohesive teams through mutual
trust
Create shared understanding
Provide a clear commander's intent
Exercise disciplined initiative
Use mission orders
Accept prudent risk

---------- Page 42 ----------
The same strategies are advocated by
on trust in his book Team of Teams. He
leadership and business empowerment
stated "Purpose affirms trust, trust affirms
gurus, whereby organizations create a
purpose, and together they forge individu-
system of trust and mutual understanding
als into a working team" (McChrystal et
of the objectives and then let those empow-
al., 2015). This demonstrates the inter-
ered people achieve great results. Looking
relationship between elements of Mission
at the key tenets of Mission Command,
Command of building cohesive teams
other parts of the strategy are likely used
through mutual trust, creating shared
in one form or another in various successful
understanding, and providing a clear
organizations but with varying terminol-
commander's intent. Taking a cue from
ogy. It's likely that some SAR teams and
organizational culture, having clear mission
organizations are already using some
and vision statements reinforced by lead-
elements of the strategy but with different
ers and well understood by every member
descriptive terminology.
helps to fulfill the tenets of having clear
Search and rescue operations tend
intent and shared understanding. Many
to require hierarchical structures and
people understandably glaze over when
command networks for safety and opera-
talk of mission and vision comes about,
tional reasons. How then do elements of
but many times it is because they become
the Mission Command framework inte-
empty statements as they are not reinforced
grate into an Incident Command System
or demonstrated by leaders and supervi-
(ICS) based control structure? To be clear,
sors. When teams have developed a shared
Mission Command is not a replacement for
understanding and mutual trust, then a
ICS but speaks more to a cultural frame-
much better framework is in place for them
work and leadership philosophy which
to operate based on centralized intent.
can enhance speed of decision making and
Former nuclear submarine Commander L.
initiative. This can happen within the ICS
David Marquet, (2015) remarked on this
structure. In most cases where there is clar-
similarly in his book Turn the Ship Around!:
ity on what is essential to complete the task
A True Story of Turning Followers into Leaders:
and orders can be given through reliable
"Empowerment does not work without the
communication means, subordinate team
attributes of competence and clarity."
leaders and individual rescuers may not
Under Mission Command, subordi-
need to exercise elements of the strategy.
nates have a duty to exercise disciplined
But not everything always goes to plan.
initiative, but within the commanders'
Having a cultural framework in place based
intent (Caroe, 2020). With regard to the
on Mission Command can help operations
dynamics of teams that may be involved
when command and control breaks down
in a cave rescue, that initiative might be
or other opportunities arise. As leadership
delegated to the team leaders and not
advocate Simon Sinek has said, "Always
necessarily individual cavers who may
plan for the fact that no plan ever goes
not be as skilled and trusted. This element
according to plan." These strategies should
is key to the original concept of Mission
be enacted and integrated into team culture
Command, where the leaders close to the
well before an incident response.
action were better positioned to make deci-
One aspect which is critical to Mission
sions, provided they were empowered to
Command success is competence (U.S.
do SO. Empowering those with competence
Army, 2019). Because Mission Command
can enable swifter outcomes, a key in cave
grants more freedom of action, it also
rescues where the "golden hour" of deliv-
demands more of subordinates (Caroe,
ering a casualty to medical aid is almost
2020). To have the trust required of decen-
never attainable.
tralizing decision making, leaders must
Other elements can be integrated into a
have confidence in the skills of the team. A
team's organizational culture as well. "Use
well-trained and cohesive cave rescue team
mission orders" closely equates to proper
can likely be trusted with decisions made
briefings and is likely a standard operat-
at lower levels. In cave rescue, there are
ing procedure already. Where Mission
some roadblocks to this. Student rescuers
Command is concerned, there is a specific
or rescuers who perform cave rescue infre-
element about these orders. Orders should
focus on what needs to be accomplished
quently may not understand the big picture
or may memorize systems rather than the
and not on how exactly to do it, relying
concepts behind them. And cavers called
on those closer to the action to determine
into rescues as convergent volunteers can
the exact best way to achieve the task (U.S.
have a wide range of skills. Both of those
Army, 2019). This is not unlike a cave rescue
situations demand increased scrutiny by
rigging team devising the best way to rig
leaders, and improvisation might violate
a pitch based on what they observe rather
principles of safety to the rescuers or the
than having it dictated to them.
casualty.
Implementing Mission Command has
General Stanley McChrystal remarked
not been without challenges, however, and
A cave rescue briefing. Photo by Charlene
Forrest.
many militaries have had struggles with
fully adopting the principles involved. One
challenge is in truly adopting decentralized
execution in the way required (Brender,
2016; English, 2014). The hierarchical
structures of militaries (and sometimes
emergency services agencies) are not
always comfortable with delegating control
to the extent that Mission Command might
advocate. Pushing some of the decision-
making authority down to the lowest
levels is hard to swallow in organizations
that have explicit chains of command and
especially detailed orders and procedures.
McChrystal et al., (2015) recognized this
discomfort and remarked that his teams
"decentralized until it made us uncomfort-
able, and it was right there on the brink of
instability we found our sweet spot."
Other elements of the philosophy--of
exercising disciplined initiative and accept-
ing prudent risk, in the style of Mission
Command--might also be uncomfortable
for organizations. These elements arise
from one of the original elements as written
by von Moltke. Mistakes were preferable
to hesitancy to enable decisive bold action
(Stewart, 2010, as cited in Sharpe and
Creviston, 2015). If organizational culture
is to allow decentralized execution when
the time comes, an understanding must be
there with team leaders that sometimes this
may mean mistakes. Of course, centralized
intent or mission/vision should always rein-
force safety of the responders, casualty, and
public, SO clarity on what "bold action" is
allowed should be tempered by the shared
understanding of the safety of all rescuers.
While Mission Command excels in the
uncertainty of combat, it does SO with the
assumption that leaders and soldiers are
tactically and technically competent (Caroe,
2020). Achieving competency requires
training, education, and self-development.
The levels of knowledge of junior personnel
in techniques and procedures within their
specialist domains need to be high. If the
technical capabilities of the team are lower

---------- Page 43 ----------
and must be more tightly controlled and
Marquet, L. D., 2015. Turn the Ship Around!
supervised, decentralized execution might


********** London, England: Portfolio Penguin.
not be a prudent style.
McChrystal, S. A., Silverman, D., Collins, T.,
and Fussell, C., 2015. Team of Teams. London,
The different command philoso-
England: Portfolio Penguin.
phies have evolved to suit organizations
Shamir, E., 2011. Transforming Command: The
concerned and their purposes. While
Pursuit of Mission Command in the U.S.,
Mission Command philosophy has evolved
British, and Israeli Armies. Stanford: Stanford
to exploit opportunities in combat, elements
University Press.
of the philosophy can carry over to other
Sharpe, J.D., and Creviston, T.E., 2015.
kinds of operations such as those in emer-
Understanding Mission Command. https://
gency services and search and rescue
www.army.mil/article/106872/understand-
ing_mission_command (Accessed March
groups. This can especially be true in
1,2021).
dynamic situations where the regular
command and control structures are
not available, such as in communica-
tions interruptions like those experienced
underground.
Steve Hudson (NSS 11444 RL,FE,OS) was a founder of the National Cave
Traditional organizational cultural
Rescue Commission (NCRC) in the late 1970s and supported it through the
philosophies exist in stable environments
next four decades. He served as one of its first instructors, as the Southeast-
where uncertainty is an exception-some-
ern Region Coordinator, as the National Coordinator, and as the Training Co-
thing to be specially managed. Mission
ordinator. Hudson owned and operated Pigeon Mountain Industries (PMI)
Command accepts that there is chaos and
uncertainty and builds a cultural frame-
and was an internationally acknowledged expert on rope and rope rescue. He
work to be resilient to that uncertainty.
used his experience to raise standards and practices in industrial rope access
In a cave rescue there is great benefit to
as well. He was a founder of the Society of Professional Rope Access Techni-
having this resilience built into the cultural
cians (SPRAT) and an author of High Angle Rescue Techniques. Hudson served
framework ahead of time, so that better
as Deputy Director of Emergency Services for Walker County, Georgia, and
outcomes are possible. At the least, giving
was a recipient of its Distinguished Service Award. He was also the recipient
clear direction and parameters for the team
of the International Technical Rescue's Lifetime Achievement Award. Hudson
well in advance of an incident can facilitate
donated countless hours to teaching rescue techniques to make cavers safer. In
positive outcomes. Teams will benefit from
recognition of his lifetime of service, the National Speleological Society created
having that cultural framework in place, to
the Steve Hudson Award for Service to Cave Rescue.
include enhanced trust, clear intent, and
enhanced organizational cohesion even if
decentralized decisions are never required.
Steve Hudson Award for Service to Cave Rescue recipients:
2016-Diane Cousineau
About the Author
2017 - Harold & Nancy Chrimes
Christian Stenner is the Alberta
2018 - Don Paquette
Provincial Coordinator for Alberta/British
2019 - Rod Dennison
Columbia Cave Rescue Service, and a
2020 - Ken Laidlaw
Captain in the Canadian Armed Forces
Reserve. He has been a caver for over 16
years and has been involved in expedi-
tion caving in Canada, the U.S.A., and
Mexico. He holds a certificate in profes-
THE BALLAD
sional management with specialization
of
in risk management from the University
PETE
of Calgary, and the Canadian Risk
Management designation.
HAUER
It Was Caves that Pete Loved the Best
References
Brender, B., 2016. The Problem of Mission
Command. https://thestrategybridge.org/
the-bridge/2016/9/1/the-problem-of-mission-
command (Accessed March 1, 2021).
Caroe, A., 2020. Mission Command: The Army's
Powerful Leadership Tool. https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=6g9ur41Y7vc
Roland Vinyard
(Accessed March 23, 2021).
Dupuy, T. N., 1977. A Genius for War: The
German Army and General Staff, 1807-1945.
London: Macdonald & Jane's.
English, A., 2014. Whatever Happened to
NSS BOOKSTORE
Mission Command in the CAF? Canadian
MEMBERS.CAVES.ORG/STORE
Military Journal, V. 14, no. 3., pp. 73-75.
10% discount for NSS members
Stewart, K. G., 2010, The Evolution of Command
Approach. 15th International Command and
Control Research and Technology Symposium,
Defence Research and Development Canada,
Toronto, ON
Storr, J., 2003. A command philosophy for the
information age: The continuing relevance
of mission command, Defence Studies, V. 3
no. 3, pp. 119-129.
United States Army, 2019. Mission Command:
Command and Control of Army Forces, ADP
6-0. Washington, D.C.: Headquarters, United
States Department of the Army.
Steve Hudson Award
for Service to Cave Rescue
"Everyone knew Pete. A caver/hippie
homesteader, a Pacifist, and also a motiveless,
unpremeditated murderer. His will made clear
his guilt. This sufficed for the police, but for us,
as many doors were opened as closed. Before
Pete's remains were found, the case involved
witches, drugs, homosexuality. The FBI
attended our 1975 Convention; weird stuff
began happening; Pete's livestock were brutally
slaughtered. Today we try to make sense of it,
and wrangle over "What really happened?"
by Roland Vinyard
237 pages, Softcover, $23.00
BOOKSTORE@CAVES.ORO
(256) 852-1300

---------- Page 44 ----------
TECHNOLOGY
Wisdom Lamp 4
not expensive and can be found at Wallmart
where they sell suitcases or in airports as
The Wisdom Lamp 4 is a multi purpose
well as online. An optional external charger
Lamp made by New Wisdom Investment
is offered as well. The light slides into this
Limited. Like many other lights these are
charger. Instead of using a "female end"
made in Shenzhen China, this is a large
charge port found on many sport lights this
city near Hong Kong The US Distributor is
light has charge points on the exterior made
Northwest Mine Supply in Wallace, Idaho.
of stainless steel and the charger contacts
Wisdom also manufactures other mining
steel and gold plated brass. The USB cord
lights and chargers. Not long after I began
connects to these points magnetically. This
caving I used a miners lamp popular with
is a much better design as it does not allow
cavers from the 1950s to 1990s called The
dust and water in like the more traditional
Kohler Wheat Lamp. During that era The
charge port. The light can also be used as
Kohler Wheat Lamp was considered by
a power bank for charging cell phones or
US cavers to be the best electric headlamp.
other small devices using the included cord
Mining lamps are typically made very sturdy
that connect to these same charge points.
as they are designed for daily use. This
The light housing measures 3 inches wide
particular model is compact and suitable for
and 2 and 3/4 inches tall. A flat blade is
cave exploration and many other outdoor
mounted that allows it to connect to included
activities. Wisdom is starting to market this
head strap that has a angle adjustment on
light to the caving community. Using the
the blade itself, something I have yet to see
included accessories this light can be used
on any other light. You can also mount this
for bicycling, night hunting, mining, cave
light to a helmet by drilling two holes and
exploration and just about anywhere light
running a tight wide zip tie horizontally or by
is needed. As of this writing the cost of this
simply purchase ing a flat blade mount. Also
light is 159.00 dollars.
included in my package a bicycle handlebar
mount and the magnetic mount that the flat
The light uses a Cree S5 LED. It is
blade slides into to attach it to a metal surface
powered by 2 Panasonic 18650B Lithium
for hands free light for situations like working
Ion batteries. These batteries are arranged
under the hood of a car or anywhere hands
in a parallel arrangement giving the light
free light is needed. Also included is a nice
7000mAh of power. The construction is
lanyard. The light has a two year warranty
bulletproof PC. The mold design strength-
and here in the USA, the light can be sent
ens the hardness of the housing and lessens
during this time to the US Distributor for
internal stress allowing for impact resistance
warranty service.
suitable for the demands of any cave environ-
ment. The water resistance according to the
One thing I like about this light compared
specs is 50 meters. This is much more than
to some is a rather simple switch operation.
other lights cavers now use. This is possible
Only three output settings with a nice range
due to the entire light being sealed including
of the three. Low of 50 Lumens, medium
the batteries. The weight is 169 grams. The
of 265 Lumens and a high of 533 Lumens.
light can be charged with the included USB
The Lux ratings on these three outputs are
cord. Also included is a wall plug, mine was a
1800, 12,000 and 25,000. Run times are
European style plug but I did have an adaptor
listed at 60 hours for the 50 lumen setting,
for US style wall plugs. These adaptors are
13 hours for the mid setting of 265 lumens
WISDOM LAMP 4A-03
S/N 1260251
3.7V 7000mAh
CEOFC ©IP68
533LM
Working
Power
nput:5.0V.2.0A
W:SOS
Made in China
A magnetic connector is used to attach a USB cable for charging. This reduces the possibility of flooding the light but can be a problem for
reading a compass near it.
Like many popular headlamps, the batteries
are contained in the same housing as
the light, avoiding the pitfalls of a wired
connection.
and 5 hours for the high setting of 533
lumens. Do not assume that since your
favorite light may have higher lumens it is
brighter. I made that assumption also until
I got this in my hands. The light also has a
"gear lock" feature that allows you to use just
one of the three output settings. This can be
done with a simple double press of switch
when on. Pressing the button when off for
three seconds will put the light in SOS mode.
Once press while in this mode will shut the
SOS off. Cavers do not use this feature but
this may be required for mining safety. This
may come in handy for a search and rescue
situation. A few lens covers are included to
give you a range of optic options. The bare
lens will give a somewhat concentrated far
reaching spot. A spot much further reaching
than any I have yet to see on a headlamp.
The included diffuser lens covers give you a
variety of flood options and one is for red
light if needed. These covers snap on easily
and stay attached via a tiny lanyard like cord
to keep you from losing it. I find the covers
handy for protecting the bare lens from
possible scratching while in transit or if the
light needs to be carried in a cave pack. I

---------- Page 45 ----------
Left: Detachable
diffuser changes the
lamp from a spot beam
to a flood. It attaches
to the main unit with a
lanyard
Description
dps
Power
bank
tried these covers at home in the dark and
tried one diffuser that at home seemed to
found one particular that gave a nice flood
be the most usable flood pattern for caving
that lights up around your feet without having
and also was impressed. A week later I took
to point the light at your feet. A battery
this light to a larger passage Kentucky cave
indicator feature is activated by pressing the
with 100 plus foot tall domes and this light
switch when off for more than 1.5 seconds.
had no problem lighting these domes. I also
The main light LED and two auxiliary LEDs
swim laps regular at my local gym and took it
flash a series of light combinations to indicate
to the pool and placed it on bottom running
current battery status. Once you get about
in about 4 feet of water for close to an hour
one hour from the battery being drained
and that did not seem to be any issue have
the lamp will softly flash one time every five
a high level of confidence this light will hold
seconds as a reminder that battery is nearly
up to the rigors of cave exploration. This light
used up. During this flashing you can turn
also has numerous third party certifications
the flashing off with a two second press of
that I assume are required for mining safety.
the switch.
I have copies of each of the certifications
including ISO.
I received my sample in January of
2021. The package I received has all the
This is the final part of my review
accessories I described above. I charged it
where I will give the pros and cons of this
up as it like many Lith Ion lights it was sent
light as far as its use for cave exploration.
with a partial charge. I turned it on inside the
No light I have yet to see has no cons. The
house first before dark and was impressed. I
pros certainly outweigh the cons and I also
waited until dark and took it out in my large
take into consideration this is a multi sport
backyard and turned it on
all
I
can
say
lamp made by a company that makes mining
was WOW !! A far reaching spot beam with a
lights. This light produces a more intense
"hotspot that is most similar to spot specific
spot than any cave worthy headlamp I have
flashlights. I compared it to some of my best
yet to see and I have seen and reviewed
headlamps both multi sport style and more
many. The tilt feature on the flat blade is
expensive cave specific small batch lights and
something new to me. The water resistance
none were close in spot intensity and range.
rating is greater than any other non dive
I waited a couple weeks and took it to a
rated headlamp I am aware of, much greater
moderate passage size Indiana cave and was
in fact. The spot intensity is due in part to
impressed. At first my fear was with the bare
the large and very polished reflector. Larger
lens that it would not put enough light around
and deeper than reflectors on any other cave
my feet without having to look directly down.
worthy headlamp I have yet to see. This is a
I prefer a spot beam for traversing through a
smart design as it is better to get your output
cave. This was not a problem for me I also
from the reflector than by simply pumping
more lumens. This will allow the light to run
longer, not draining the battery as soon or
getting near as hot and having to step down
on its high setting not long after turning on
the highest output setting. This to me is a
huge plus. The accessories and diffusers give
a wide variety of optic options. A very well
Comparison of the Wisdom Light spotlight
thought out design in many ways. The price
(left) with spot from a more expensive light
is reasonable considering what all you get.
rated at 1200 lumens.
This outperformed many more expensive
Wisdom 4 light in use on a wet cave trip. The
light has an underwater rating of 50 meters
and because it doesn't open, there are no
o-rings to maintain to ensure integrity.
lights. The weight to me feels fine mounted
to the front of a climbing helmet. The cons
are few, one is that you cannot remove the
batteries, I understand why this is done to
make it more waterproof. This may be an
issue for some cavers depending on the
nature of their trips. Expedition cavers are
used to being able to replace batteries and
have unlimited run times for multi day expe-
ditions. Most cavers are recreational and trips
typically last 4 to 6 hours maybe. Run times
will be more than sufficient for those trips.
I will say here you can get the low setting
of 50 lumens that gives sufficient light to
traverse many caves for 60 hours. I ran mine
on the mid setting and only turning the high
setting up to spot tall domes or look at larger
trunk passage. Another con is it produces a
magnetic field as the charge cord connects
connects via a magnet. Magnets can throw
off survey devices cavers use to maps caves.
This will only be an issue to those who map
caves. Again the majority of cavers are
recreational cavers. Another very slight con
is the light has a somewhat sensitive switch.
The batteries can not be removed SO it may
be possible for this light to get turned on
accidentally while in transit or storage. I am
told there is a switch cover but my sample did
not include one. The only cavers out there
that may have an issue with this light are the
few multi day expedition cavers and those
who survey. Overall, I have a very positive
impression of this light and do not think it
can be touched in spot distance output and
the value for what it cost is very nice. This will
be my go to" headlamp for now.
I would like to thank Northwest Mining
Supply and New Wisdom Investment for
their sample and allowing me to review
this light.
Jeff Cody

---------- Page 46 ----------
PRESIDENT MESSAGE
NSS Convention
year. The existing cases are almost full and
As most of you know, the Summer
funds to purchase three additional cases have
2021 NSS Convention has been moved to
been donated.
a virtual convention. Please check the NSS
Brick sales for the Memorial Patio
and the convention web sites for the latest
around the flagpole at the Headquarters are
updates on events. While I will miss getting
continuing. This has been a popular fund-
to see old friends and making new ones at an
raising program with the Headquarters, and
in-person convention, a virtual convention
we are hoping to have 250 bricks sold for
allows folks that normally cannot make it to
a fall bricklaying effort. If you would like to
join in and get a taste for our annual meet-
sponsor a case or donate a commemorative
ing. I hope to see everyone in person at the
brick, please contact the NSS office at (256)-
2022 South Dakota convention.
852-1300 or visit the webpage.
Grottos and individual volunteers have
NSS Special Board Meeting on
been participating in work weekends follow-
April 19th
ing social distancing protocols. In the last few
At the special NSS Board of Governors
months, the Dogwood City Grotto installed
meeting on April 19th, the board modified
most of the privacy slats in the new fence
a number of bylaws related to the timing of
along Pulaski Pike, Sewanee Mountain
officer elections. The officers are elected by
Grotto painted the front of the building a
the BoG each year. The election of the NSS
limestone gray and also donated the paint for
President was moved from the spring BoG
the work. The Huntsville Grotto has helped
meeting to the fall meeting and the new
remove the old cabinets and other material in
president will be seated at the close of the
the back five rooms. We are reviewing archi-
following spring meeting. The board also
tectural drawing to turn some of the rooms
moved the election of the vice-presidents
from the summer annual meeting to the
spring BoG meeting. The Society seats
elected board members at the summer
meeting. Moving the selection of officers
allows newly elected board members to
become familiar with the NSS operations
and prospective candidates. The board
also passed an act to implement the use
of Google Documents for preparation of
Board agendas.
Annual Convention Board of
Governors Meeting
The annual NSS Board of Governors
meeting will be held virtually on Saturday,
July 24, 2021 at 9 am PDT and if needed, on
Sunday, July 25th at 9 am PDT. Information
The Fine Arts Salon
on how to attend the meeting will be posted
The NSS is holding the annual NSS
on the NSS webpage.
Auction over the week of our Black Box/
Salon. If anyone would like to contribute
NSS Headquarters
any work, we would be delighted! The
As of July 1st, we will owe $45,331.28
Salon opening will be filmed and a guided
to pay off the mortgage. Rentals are occur-
tour around the exhibits and what HQ has
ring now and are expected to be back to
to offer in displays and display cases. This
normal by the beginning of 2022. Maureen
will be shown online at Virtual Convention.
Handler, Chris Foster, the Dogwood City
As Salon Chair, I am looking for a vari-
Grotto and other volunteers have taken
ety of artwork to be entered to be shown,
advantage of the lull in rentals over the
Judged, or not judged. That is an option
last few months to replace the fluorescent
for all entrants for this exhibition. Quilters
lights in the ballroom with LED lights. The
should let me know sizes and dimensions
replacement will save on cooling costs, elec-
of quilts ready to enter this year's Fine
tricity, and bulb replacement. This work was
Arts Salon to be held at Huntsville HQ
completed at the end of April.
over the weekend of 23-24th July 2021.
We are still raising additional funds to
Judging will occur Saturday afternoon, and
expand our museum exhibits and hope to
winners will be announced at the Black
purchase a total of five additional cases this
Box Opening. This event is to be filmed for
into a conference and educational center.
Work weekends at the Headquarters
are scheduled for the 3rd weekend of each
month. For more information on volunteer-
ing, contact Maureen Handler, OVP at ovp@
caves.org.
Briteweb has been selected as our
contractor and they are working on redesign
of the NSS website. We anticipate the new
website will be up and running at the end of
July or early August. I know that many of us
are looking forward to the website upgrades.
Membership
Membership increased slightly (56)
during the month of March. As of 30 April
2021, we had 7,448 members with the
70,971 being the highest NSS number
issued. This is an increase of 56 members
from March 2021. Membership appears to
be holding steady or slightly increasing over
this year to date. Please consider renewing
your membership in the NSS.
Geary Schindel
Virtual Convention SO all NSS membership
will see our lovely gallery and the contents
on show over the rest of the month of July
and on into August.
"The Pedestal" by the late Glenn
Mills, will be the main feature for the Black
Box opening and Salon July 24th 2021
in Huntsville. This is your inspiration and
color palette for Artwork displayed in the
box. Competition will be tough as the room
is tiny but it needs IMPACT! Any artwork
that cannot make the mark for the box
may also STILL be deemed worthy and
will hang in the main gallery for the main
competing event-the 2021 Fine Arts
Salon Competition. It is not compulsory to
compete as some of us just want to see and
show great art. The competing event will be
judged by professionals from professional
art establishments in Huntsville, including
the Huntsville Museum of Arts. https://
hsvmuseum.org/
Form to enter this years NSS Fine
Arts Salon:. https://documentcloud.adobe.
com/link/review
Deadline to enter: 23rd July. Venue
is NSS HQ, 6001 Pulaski Pike, Huntsville.
Black box gallery opening date:
Saturday, 24th July.
For more info visit the SpeleoArt
Facebook page.
If you are planning on being at this
event, please ask for an invitation. Thanks.
Carolina Shrewsbury
carolina@hawaiiflow.com

---------- Page 47 ----------
UNDERGROUND URDATI
West Virginia Caver
Underwater Speleology
West Virginia Grottos
Cave Diving Section of the NSS
April 2021, Vol. 39, Number 2
July-December 2020, Vol. 47, Number 3-4
Returning to the CrawlMaster 900 leads
Cenote Canún is a skeleton and artifact
in The Maxwelton section of the Great
filled underwater cave on the northeast-
Savannah Cave System, cavers explored
ern coast of the Yucatan peninsula. First
and surveyed through the two borehole leads
explored and documented by divers during a
that had been left behind on last trip. Close
National Geographic expedition in the early
to 800 feet of mostly walking passage was
surveyed, however, two of the best leads
terminated in a mud plug and a sumped pool.
CALENDAR
Following an enticing breeze into a
July 24, 2021-Th annual NSS Board of
collapsing sinkhole, Nikki Fox and Campbell
Governors meeting will be held virtually on
Hunter happened upon a lost sandstone
Saturday, July 24, 2021 at 9 am PDT and if
cave. They could find no documentation of
needed, on Sunday, July 25th at 9 am PDT.
Information on how to attend the meeting will be
the cave, SO they recruited Greg Springer
posted on the NSS webpage.
to help survey the find. All 685 feet of cave
July 25-July 30, 2021-Virtual NSS convention,
passage is located within sandstone, making
see http://nss2021.caves.org/
it a geological oddity and the longest known
July 25-July 30, 2021- Western Region
Speleo-Ed, Weed, California. Camping, cave
sandstone cave in West Virginia. Tolly's
trips, workshops, social events! http://wr2021.
Secret Cave, named after the landowner
nsswest.org/
who enthusiastically gave the cavers the lead,
August 6-8, 2021-Come to the 68th Annual
Indiana Cave Capers 2021 Edition! This year
is a mazy, collapse-filled cavern with numer-
we are back at Crawford County 4H Fairgrounds
ous calamite (tree-like horsetails) fossils and
near Morengo, Indiana, home of the 2007 NSS
a few small coal seams.
National Convention. This will be another great
Capers hosted by the Central Indiana Grotto
Nikki Fox and Casey Tucker followed a
featuring access to some of the most rare and
high lead in the Sweetwater section of the
beautiful caves in Indiana. Enjoy camping, live
music, banquet, speaker, prizes and more!
Great Savannah Cave System, finding
Watch for pre-registration discounts and more
good wind and a fair amount of passage.
info coming soon. For more information, go to
www.cigcaves.com
After completing a sketchy 17-foot free
climb, Casey was able to rig a rope for
the duo to gain easy access to a wide, low
passage that continued for several hundred
feet. While there is some vertical error in
CLASSIFIED ADS
the survey, current estimates place this new
passage less than 40 feet below the bottom
Speleobooks Private Collection 50 Year Sale.
https://speleobooks.secure-mall.com/ 518-295-
of a known surface sink, hinting at the
7978 emily@speleobooks.com No convention
possibility of another entrance to the Great
this year so Speleobooks owner Emily Davis is
Savannah System.
offering her life long collection of rare cave books
for sale. We look forward to seeing you at future
Sag Rag
caving events.
Shasta Area Grotto
West Virginia Cave Books
www.WVASS.org
January-February 2021, Vol. 40, No. 1
Caver Owned Camping in the Heart of TAG.
Liz Wolff published an updated map of
Special price to NSS members. Visit us on
Plutos Cave, one of the largest lava caves
Facebook or CaversParadise.com
in the Shasta region. The new map shows
Is your Grotto or Region looking for new caves
2755.5 feet of passage and better details the
to explore in the Virginia area? RASS can
fractured nature of the cave. A few smaller
offer your group a complimentary place to
camp in Bath County, VA, once the COVID-19
passages left off the initial 1983 map that
situation has improved. There are more than
terminate in a breakdown room were also
100 caves within an hour drive. We support
added to the map. After overlaying the new
cave conservation and education. Contact Richie
data and a surface survey on Google Earth,
Ellison at rellison1120@gmail.com
this terminal breakdown room appears to
The Richmond Area Speleological Society
be less than 10 feet from a blowing surface
(RASS) supports cave conservation, education
feature. However, without technical digging
AD RATES: Now based on the number of lines your ad takes up. It is a flat rate of $3 per line. As a guide, a
or heavy machinery Liz thinks it is unlikely
line holds 43-45 characters + spaces at our font and size. 10% discount for runs of 3 months or pre.Payment
must precede publication, but copy should be e-mailed to the editor (nssnews@caves.org), to reserve space.
a new entrance will be opened.
Copy should be received one month prior to publication date (e.g., by May 1 for a June issue). Make checks
payable to the National Speleological Society and send to: Att: NSS NEWS ADVERTISING, 6001 Pulaski Pike NW,
Huntsville, AL35810.
Reuter
2000s the cave contains the remains of 14
humans, bones of several extinct species
of animal and an abundance of manmade
vessels. More recently, cave divers Luis
Sánchez and Antonio Ceballos, who are
undertaking additional exploration in Cenote
Canún, have discovered additional artifacts
and two new sets of human remains.
August 13 - 15, 2021-Karst-O-Rama, at Great
Saltpetre Cave Preserve, Mt. Vernon, Kentucky.
We're bringing Karst-O-Rama back! Great cave
trips and camping, vendors, and a live band with
a costume party pair well with our sauna, hot
tub, creek splashing, and, of course, feeding
your thirst at the Guano Grill for three days of
downright speleo-fun! This year's theme has yet
to be decided. KOR is hosted by the Greater
Cincinnati Grotto with pre-registration discounts
and info available soon! For more information,
see our website at: karstorama.com/.
October 7-10th, 2021-(Columbus Day
weekend). The TAG Fall Cave-In, hosted by the
Dogwood City Grotto. Pre-registration to open
soon.
November 1-5, 2021-2021 National Cave and
Karst Management Symposium (NCKMS 2021)
will be held in San Marcos, TX Featuring Dale
Pate, to speak at the banquet! Field trips to local
caves and special access to local show caves!
Glass-bottom boat tour of local spring! T-shirt!
Online pre-registration is open. Reserve your
hotel room for reduced rates. More details at
symposium2021.nckms.org
and research by offering grants to assist
projects aligned with these goals. To receive
a grant request application please email us at
rass-grants-committee@googlegroups.com.
Applications reviewed quarterly.
New WV Cave Books: Bulletin 20 Caves &
Karst of the Culverson Creek Basin, WV by
Lucas, Balfour, and Dasher. 336 pages, 364
caves, 208 photos, 80 maps. Color copy on
USB drive. $35 postpaid; Bulletin 21 Caves
and Karst of Mercer & Summers Counties,
5/22
WV by Schaer and Dasher. 186 pages, 226
caves, 131 photos, 62 maps. $25 postpaid.
WVASS, PO Box 200, Barrackville, WV 26559
WVASS@PrehistoricPlanet.com
NEW BOOK: Caving Alabama with the
Huntsville Grotto by Frances Johnston, assisted
by Jim Johnston, NSS 1718F. Early discoveries
from 1956 on. Full color, softback only, 8 1/2 X
11 size, 146 pages, view and order direct from
Amazon.com to your home, price $19.98.

---------- Page 48 ----------
American Caving
Accidents
2019-2020
