
---------- Page 1 ----------
1985 American Gaving Accidents

---------- Page 2 ----------
November 1986
Volume 44, Number 11
published monthly by The National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, AL 35810. Subscription rate is $15 per year. When changing an
address, give old address as well as new. Second-class postage paid at
Huntsville, AL and additional mailing offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the National Speleological Society,
Inc., Cave Avenue, Huntsville, AL 35810.
COPYRIGHT 1986
All rights reserved. No portion may be reproduced without
written permission of the National Speleological Society.
The National Speleological Society
American Caving Accidents
CAVE EXPLORING AND THE RIGHT TO DIE
In the hazardous endeavors of man there is a basic conflict. On the one hand
there is the desire by some to "risk it all" and, on the other, the commitment of
society to rescue or recover one of its own. The risk-takers would like to be totally
free of obligation yet society feels a duty to rescue one in trouble, no matter how
foolish the predicament-and therein lies the conflict.
Both aspects seem to have rationality. The risk-takers are presumably expressing
a basic humanity, a basic instinct if you will-the urge to explore, to push the
frontier, to expand the physical limits of our species. Where would humanity be if
we had never taken a risk? And it appears that this urge to explore is not something
that can simply be turned off.
Rescue or recovery is equally supportable. It is possibly instinctive; in any case,
as those who have participated in a rescue might attest, it is very satisfying. What
more noble deed to commit than to rescue one's own? Bodies must be brought back
for both legal and moral reasons-proper burial, etc. So the result in some cases is
society going to great effort and risk to fulfill this need.
Yet there always arise situations where society tries to limit the risk-taking.
There are areas where such is regulated and, usually because of liability problems,
there are property owners who prohibit risk-taking on their property. Sometimes
the regulation is not accepted and litigation results. Years ago the Park Service at
Mt. Rainier National Park required an application listing your qualifications and
experience and an equipment inspection before a climb was allowed. If experience
or equipment were deficient, you were disallowed. Later, a suit was filed and
resulted in the lifting of such restrictions-if you wanted to endanger yourself
through inexperience or faulty equipment, it was your right. Yet society was not
absolved of the obligation to aid you if you did get into trouble.
But what if society tries to drop its rescue obligation? In the 50's the North Face
of the Eiger in Switzerland was declared to be too hazardous by the Swiss Guides
(who were charged with rescue) and anyone attempting a climb would be on their
Guides would not rescue them. This was brought to the test in 1957 when
two Italians, Corti and Longhi, attempted the first Italian ascent. A storm blew in
and it was obvious to all that they would need help. The Guides were steadfast, so
climbers from all over Europe came to assist-French, Dutch, German, Italian,
Polish. They hauled rescue gear to the summit and after the storm abated, lowered
a man on a steel cable 1,000 feet down the face; Corti was hauled up. They could not
reach the other Italian, Longhi. Tied by his climbing rope to a piton, he eventually
died, fell off his ledge, and for years hung on the face for all to see, an
embarrassment to the Swiss Guides who had refused to help.
STAFF
Editor
Steve Knutson
Production
Mike & Lynne Sims
Advertising Manager
Scott Fee
Front and Back Cover Photos
Rio Atima, Honduras by Steve Knutson
No matter how rational the local regulation of risk-taking, society at large can be
expected to attempt rescue or recovery. Besides the legal aspects, the news media
simply would demand it. Thus, when you hear of caves where "rescue would be
impossible," don't believe it-it may prove unfeasible, but society would surely
attempt it.
In caving circles one might hear the view that the non-organizational caver, the
casual knotted-rope and flashlight type, should be regulated but not the "real"
cavers-we high-tech, organizational types. Our explorations are meaningful and
important! But is this fair? The nerd who goes into a cave and falls down the first pit
he sees may be experiencing as great and meaningful an exploratory thrill as
someone breaking a depth record with state of the art expertise. It's really all a
fantasy trip and pretty meaningless when compared to the mainstream of human
endeavor. So where does this leave the people who consider it their "right" to take
risks? -Those who say that they are not responsible if a rescuer is hurt or an
expenditure made rescuing them from difficulty? Out on a psychological limb. In
most cases such freedom does not exist.
I believe that risk-taking should be considered a human right, as long as it does
not directly endanger others. I further believe that rescuers should have the right to
refuse to rescue in especially hazardous situations. Neither belief addresses reality.
Perhaps what is needed is a "Hazardous Preoccupations" law. Under such one
might declare society exempt from obligation and then proceed with any insane
risk-taking one desired. There still might be volunteer rescue but no one would be
obligated. Don't expect such a law.
There is a fine compromise in the circles of some risky preoccupations in that the
participants organize their own rescue groups, thus exempting society at large:
Cavers have done this in the U.S. in recent years and very successfully in some
areas. Yet even in-group volunteers must be considered to be "society" and the
same conflict will arise over especially foolish undertakings.
The conclusion, it seems to me, must be that a responsible person will take into
account that any risk-taking has the potential to endanger someone else. There
doesn't seem to be any way around this unfortunate fact. Unless, perhaps, one
could manage to isolate one's self from society, as in solo caving where no one knew
where you had gone

---------- Page 3 ----------
ACA-1985 INTRODUCTION
Last issue I was afraid the great number of reports and fatalities for that year
indicated some sort of undesirable trend. Apparently that is not so; the total
number of reports for 1985, while high (61), is less than 1984. There is only one cave
fatality but, as I look through the reports, it is obvious that there are several other
incidents that easily could have been fatalities: a 100 foot plus out of control rappel,
a man spending 57 hours in a flooded cave wearing only shorts and tennis shoes
(and not able to relax the whole time), three persons swept through water-filled
caves, and a man falling free down a 30 foot pit unaware.
There were of course many scuba cave fatalities but the CDS and NACD have
such good training programs and certification that their people are seldom in
trouble.
This year I started a new classification system. The old one was really a
classification of the rescue (or necessity for one); now an additional lowercase letter
will describe the principal cause of the incident. This was suggested by lan Ellis.
If we look at the crude breakdown of accident types it is apparent that, relatively
speaking, there were a lot of cavers falling, a lot of rockfalls, equipment failures
and lost cavers. There were relatively few physiological problems-hypothermia,
illness and exhaustion.
Seriousness of Incident/Type of Rescue
AA-Fatality
A-Injury and Evacuation
B-Evacuation Only
C-Injury Only
D-No Injury or Evacuation
F-Scuba Fatality
FD-Scuba Incident
Type of Incident
c-Caver Fall
e-Equipment Failure
f-Flooding
h-Hypothermia
i-Illness
I-Lost Way
r-Rockfall
x-Exhaustion
0-Other
For 1985 we have:
A 5
B 11
C 9
D 24
F 9
AA 2
C 16
e 8
f 4
h 1
i 2
I 6
r 10
X 1


********** 0 0
As before, the analyses are not necessarily complete, but will hopefully provide
views to think about. Safety is a state of mind. Read these accounts, think about
them and use your head.
I wish to thank all those who sent in reports or info. This publication depends on
you. It also depends on Mike Dyas who looks for accidents during work on his
caving column for the NSS News. Thanks, Mike! Thanks also to Lynne and Mike
Sims for computer typesetting and staff work.
Send reports or information to:
American Caving Accidents
505 Roosevelt Street
Oregon City, OR 97045
503-655-6609
MAJOR REPORTS:
Type
Cave
State
Date
F
Cape Kinau Cave
Hawaii
2-23-84
Dc
Miller's Cave
Kentucky
January 85
BI
Bowden Cave
West Virginia
2-24
F
Godswell Sink Hole
Jamaica
3-9
F
Radium Springs
Georgia
March
Cc
Systema Purification
Mexico
3-19
Cc
Tiger Cave
Belize
3-20
Ac
Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
3-23
Be
Haddox Pit
Alabama
3-24
BI
Anderson Cave
Alabama
March
Cc
Up and Down Cave
Kentucky
4-6
Ac
Stillhouse (Falls) Cave
Alabama
5-4
Ac
Deep Creek Canyon
Colorado
6-8
De
Bird Horror Hole
Alabama
6-8
Dc
Rogue River Natural Bridge
Oregon
6-23
FDi
Madison Blue Spring
Florida
Summer
Bf
Donaldson/Bronson Cave
Indiana
7-1
F
Little River Cave
Florida
9-22
F
Spring Run Cave
Florida
10-3
F
Ebro Blue Springs
Florida
10-3
Bc
WV's Cave
West Virginia
10-19
AAr
Fuller Cave
West Virginia
11-28
F
Ponce de Leon Springs
Florida
12-29
MINOR REPORTS
Type
Cave
State
Date
D
Lookout Mtn. Caverns
Tennessee
12-9-84
DI
Mammoth Cave System
Kentucky
8-84
Bx
Lon Odell Memorial Cave
Missouri
Winter. 85
De
Un-named Pit
Tennessee
2-6
De
Dante's Descent
Arizona
2-24
Dr
Mushroom Cave
Missouri
3-9
Df
Mill Creek Cave
Tennessee
March
Df
Sotano San Agustin
Mexico
April
DI
Cueva de Rio Talgua
Honduras
4-14
Dc
Buckner's Cave
Indiana
4-27
Cc
Un-named Ice Cave
California
May
Dr
Wayne's Lost Cave
Indiana
5-11
Ac
Norman Cave
West Virginia
May
BI
Cave near San Antonio
Texas
June
Bo
Indian Grave Point Cave
Tennessee
6-11
Dr
Vinegar Ridge Cave
Kentucky
June
De
Hall's Pit
Kentucky
6-28
De
Soldier's Cave
California
Summer
Dr
Devil's Hole
Missouri
7-7
Cc
Thornhill Cave
Kentucky
7-20
Dr
Bad Medicine Cave
Wyoming
7-29
BI
Avondale Cave
Alabama
August
Ci
Rimstone River
Missouri
8-3
Do
Mueller Pit
Missouri
8-4
Dr
Fulford Cave
Colorado
8-11
Df
Mosby Cave
Missouri
8-17
FDh
Simmons-Mingo
West Virginia
8-24
De
Airman's Cave
Texas
9-6
BI
Polygamy's End Cave
Utah
9-7
Cr
Kingston Saltpeter Cave
Georgia
9-13
C
Sullivan's Cave
Indiana
September
Bc
Thunder River Cave
Arizona
September
AAr
Shelter Cave
Nebraska
September
FDe
Tyson Spring Cave
Minnesota
9-15
Drc
Cricket Cave
West Virginia
9-21
Cc
Leigh Cave
New Jersey
Fall
Br
Streamway Cave
California
10-8
Dr
Rockshelter Pit
Alabama
10-12
Dc
Newcastle Murder Hole
Virginia
10-13
Dc
Acme Quarry Cave
West Virginia
10-20
Cc
Organ Cave
West Virginia
10-25
Cr
Parks Ranch Cave
New Mexico
11-2

---------- Page 4 ----------
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED
F:Cape Kinau Cave, Hawaii


********** February 23, 1984
At 7:45 a.m. on February 23 a group of divers met at Ed Robinson's diveboat on
Maui Island, Hawaii. These were tourists, hiring Robinson and Sue, his assistant,
for a day's diving. The group included John Baird, Tom Colan, Masao Nakan and
Preston Penny (37). They were all apparently open-water certified, but not trained
in cave diving.
They discussed possibilities and decided to do a cave on Cape Kinau for a first
dive. Robinson had previously toured this cave with clients. One light per diver was
issued and a video movie of the dive would be made by Robinson. Sue would be
safety diver and follow the group.
The cave, as described by other divers familiar with it and by the survivors,
consisted of a single trunk passage with entrances at both ends, and three side
chambers: the Small Chamber, Turtle Chamber, and Deep Chamber. Depths were
apparently up to 90 100 feet in the Deep Chamber. One end of the trunk was big
enough for six divers to swim abreast. A "tight" spot led then to the main trunk
with a "very narrow" place between that and the Deep Chamber. The floor was
very silty. There was a small Middle Exit, with sunlight visible only when directly
below it. The three chambers came in order beyond the Middle Exit, and all on the
same side of the main passage.
All the divers were using 80 cubic foot cylinders filled to 3,000 psi. Robinson
would lead, filming, with Sue at the rear. At the Middle Exit an air check would be
performed - if any had less than 1,500 psi, he would return to the boat. This check
was done and all proceeded.
At the Deep Chamber, Colan saw that he was down to 600 psi and reported to
Robinson, wanting to exit. Baird saw this, and that he was also down to 600 psi and
that visibility was deteriorating. Robinson led these two out the third entrance. On
the way, Colan's sonic alarm went off and he had to share air with Robinson. At the
surface, only Baird had air left, 100 psi.
Meanwhile in the Deep Chamber, visibility had gone to near zero - one could
see only the glow of lights from other divers. Sue signalled for them to exit the
room. Nakan did so, with difficulty at the restriction and Penny apparently had to
be pushed through. Sue emerged in a cloud of silt.
Nakan and Sue then exited via the Middle Exit. When Robinson noticed a diver
was missing, he took an extra cylinder and returned with Penny a few minutes
later. Efforts to revive Penny were unsuccessful.
Reference: Joe Prosser "Hawaiian Cave Drowning" Underwater Speleology 12(6),
Oct. 1985, p 4.
Analysis: The victim was found on the bottom, with a camera in one hand and a
light in the other, his gear in place but no air in his cylinder. He was in a portion of
the cave with good visibility.
Prosser points out the many deficiencies in the party: no formal cave-dive
training, no specific emergency-escape planning, a too-elaborate plan for their air
supply or their ability to coordinate, lack of guide line, lack of two-thirds air supply
to exit on, etc. At their mid-exit air check at least half the group were at or beyond
the accepted limits for safe cave diving. As Prosser says, "This was an accident
waiting to happen - it was most fortunate that the entire team did not perish."
One should be especially cautious about undertaking a hazardous adventure with
people you don't know - it might even be safer to do it alone.
1985 REPORTS
ef:Miller's Cave, Kentucky
January 1985
In January a group four cavers was surveying in Miller's Cave, Rockcastle
County, Kentucky. After surveying in a wet crawl, searching for a misplaced pack
and prussiking back up to the main level, they proceeded along the Pitfall Trail.
This has numerous narrow pits in the floor, up to 40 feet deep. As Lorie Breeck (23)
approached a difficult traverse she went to make a three foot step across a pit. She
apparently didn't step far enough and fell backwards into the pit for about eight
feet, landing on her back at the edge of a second, similar drop.
Her companions went to her aid and found that she had suffered only a badly
bruised hip. Her cave pack had partly cushioned her fall. She was able to leave
under her own power.
References:
1) Ed. "Minor Accident in Miller's Cave" Kentucky Caver 19(1), February 1985.
2) Gary O'Dell Personal Communication April 14, 1985.
Analysis: It is commendable that the group was together - too often parties get
spread out as they exit. This accident wasn't serious but shows the need for
increased awareness and concentration while exiting a cave. When tired you are
more likely to have an accident.
BI:Bowden Cave, West Virginia


********** February 24, 1985
On Sunday, February 24, Scott Stanzel and Lou Martino entered Bowden Cave,
West Virginia. A 70 degree day outside had brought flooding from snow melt to the
local streams and they soon found similar conditions underground. They passed
upstream through 300 feet of passage six feet high by three feet wide with a three
foot depth of raging water. Beyond, they spent time warming up, then took another
two and a half hours searching for the second of three entrances to the cave.
Though they had been in the cave before, their knowledge of it was apparently
gained from a book on West Virginia caves and they thus were unaware that their
second entrance had collapsed the year before.
Meanwhile, their van, parked at the entrance, had been noticed and at one p.m.
three cavers form the Parkersburg Grotto entered the cave to check out the
situation. At the narrow stream passage they found a camera and guessed that the
van cavers were beyond; the stream was now five feet deep. They exited and went
around to the cave's third entrance which would afford access to the area where
Stanzel and Martino presumably were.
After several nasty crossings of the flooded Bickle Run, they entered the third
entrance and proceeded to the second-largest room where they encountered Stanzel
and Martino, getting ready to attempt the stream passage. They were led out in
good order, but after retracing the Bickle Run crossings one rescuer had to be
treated for hypothermia.
References:
1) Gary Ferrell "Rescue at Bowden Cave" The Parkersburg Subterranean Flier
2(4), April 1985.
2) Scott Loane "Elkins Cavers Rescue Pair Trapped in Bowden Cave by High
Waters'' News clipping, no source, date.
3) Scott Stanzel "Rescue from Bowden" The Parkersburg Subterranean Flier 2(5),
May 1985, p 3-4.
Analysis: This kind of thing is a great adventure but try not to forget that your
actions may cost the lives of rescuers.
F:Godswell Sink Hole, Jamaica


********** March 9, 1985
On March 9 three divers from the Jamaica Sub-Aqua Club went to Godswell Sink
Hole in the Clarendon area of Jamaica. The divers were Donna Ho Lung, Silvain
Gutknecht and Keith Campbell.
At the sinkhole a rope ladder is attached to a tree, giving access to a ledge at
water level, 80 feet below. They planned to descend to the bottom of the sinkhole
(-185 feet?), start up after ten minutes, decompress three minutes at 20 feet and ten
minutes at ten feet.
They started at 12:48 p.m. with 80 foot visibility and proceeded past a pile of
trees at 120 feet. At the bottom (-160 feet) a passage was seen extending downward
into a room 30 feet in diameter. The water was very clear. Gutknecht and Ho Lung
entered this lower chamber (-170 feet). This quickly became silted, dropping the
visibility to zero causing complete disorientation. Gutknecht began circling the
room with one hand on the wall and the other on the silted floor, to try to find the
outlet. Ho Lung held onto his shoulder.
When he contacted tree limbs, Gutknecht recalled these being at the entrance, so
he went in this direction. He felt Ho Lung's hand slip down to his leg. It became
hard to breathe through his regulator - he was running out of air.
Gutknecht swam faster, losing contact with Ho Lung; suddenly he saw a grey
light. He inflated (with carbon dioxide) his buoyancy compensation and headed for
the surface.
Campbell meanwhile had not descended as far since he had only a 60 cubic foot
tank. He watched as the whole bottom of the sink became silted. He went to the
edge of the silt and flashed his light. Gutknecht went by but not Ho Lung. When his
air was low, he followed Gutknecht.
Jamaica had no deep water body recovery team so NSS-CDS and NCRC were
called and a team was flown from Florida. The body was found on March 13 at -160
feet with no air in her tanks. She was outside the lower room tunnel at a place where
the ceiling of the sink angled to the floor, blocked by a tree root.
Reference: Henry Nicholson "Search and Recovery Operation - Jamaica''
Underwater Speleology 12(2) p 6-7.

---------- Page 5 ----------
Analysis: Nicholson offers the following:
1) They failed to stick to their plan - when the crystal clear room was seen, they
were lured on into a silted situation.
2) No guide line was used.
3) The one-third air supply rule was not used.
4) They were too deep - sport divers shouldn't go over -100 feet without deep
water training.
5) They had no cave-dive training.
6) No adequate lights - Ho Lung might have seen Campbell's light if it had been
brighter.
7) Ho Lung apparently didn't know how to use the extra air in her
buoyancy-compensator via the oral inflator.
8) Proper swimming technique to avoid silting - head down, feet up, was
possibly not used.
9) An alternate air source with octopus regulator was not used.
Perhaps there should be a concerted effort by NACD/NSS-CDS to provide
cave-dive education at dive shops. All divers have to get their tanks filled.
F: Radium Springs Cave, Georgia
March 1985
In March two divers entered Radium Springs in Dougherty County, Georgia.
These were Clifford Meadows (24) and Bryant Leggett. They had explored for a
while when Meadows motioned to Leggett that he wanted to surface. They were
apparently following a permanently fixed line when Leggett stopped "to correct
problems he was having with his air tank." Shortly after, he continued out to find
Meadows absent. Meadows' body was found "in a small underwater room."
Reference: Ed. "Georgian drowns in cave" Altanta Journal March 27, 1985.
Cc: Systema Purificacion, Mexico


********** March 19, 1985
In March of 1985 a group was on a week-long camp at Isopod River in the
Purificacion system in the highlands southwest of Monterrey, Mexico.
On March 19, after several days in the cave, a group of three went to the Nile
River to photograph after a surveying shift. Jim Pisarowicz (34) was positioning
himself to provide a desired flash angle when he slipped. He caught himself with
his gloved right hand on sharp eroded flowstone. A spine of this flowstone
penetrated the glove, then broke, leaving a piece lodged in the hand.
The fragment proved to be in very deep - it could not be removed at the accident
scene by use of Swiss army knives or at camp where tweezers and needles were
available. For the next two days the wound was bathed in hot water every couple of
hours and antiseptic was forced into it; tetracycline was taken orally. Pisarowicz left
the cave on the 22nd under his own power with his equipment divided among his
companions.
Back in Texas the fragment had to be removed surgically. The accident also
severed a sensory nerve and Pisarowicz has no feeling in parts of this right hand
thumb and palm.
References:
1) Jim Pisarowicz Personal Communication July 26, 1985.
2) Dave Bunnell "A Week Underground" The Explorer [So. California Grotto] May
1985, p 60.
Analysis: Just because one is "only" taking photos and not doing serious
exploration doesn't mean one doesn't have to be aware. This seemingly simple
accident proved very disabling and costly.
Accidents to hands and feet are potentially crippling due to the concentration of
nerves and tendons. Amateur surgery should be avoided and competent aid sought
quickly.
Tiger Cave, Belize, Central America


********** March 20, 1985
On March 20 a group of three cavers was in Tiger Cave in the Toledo District of
Belize in Central America. About a mile into the cave they came to a nine foot high,
overhung up-climb. This had been rigged with a piece of rope with foot loops tied
every two feet.
Two of the group ascended, unbelayed, without difficulty, but when Doug Stecko
(31) reached the top loop, he lost his balance and fell back, landing on his head and
shoulder. The other two returned immediately and found the victim conscious but
"somewhat incoherent" and unable to stand. Packs and clothing were placed on
Stecko to keep him warm. This group was part of a large Miami Valley Grotto (NSS)
expedition so one companion left for help. Fifteen minutes later Stecko was able to
402 NSS News November 1986
walk and left the cave under his own power. He still has a 50 per cent hearing loss in
his left ear.
Reference:Doug Stecko Accident Report March 26, 1985, 1 page.
Analysis: Stecko reports that their "excitement as they approached virgin cave
probably encouraged inadequate safety precautions." The group saw that the loops
were tied too far apart before they started climbing, but the first man up didn't
bother to re-tie them. I think this accident points up the flaw in the use of cable
ladders, or as in this case, a rope ladder, for vertical work: When one is in a hurry, a
belay is easy to put off, mentally. If a drop is rigged with a rope and one prusiks,
you are tied to the rope, whether in a hurry or not. Yet, if there is only one drop in a
long stretch of cave, it is tempting to use ladders so that vertical gear need not be
hauled a long distance for a single use.
In the process of hurrying to the victim, one companion descended the rope
ladder so hurriedly that he received a large cut on one leg and a bad bruise on one
arm. A rescuer almost became a victim.
In a remote setting such as this, one should use greater precaution than usual.
Even a nine foot drop is serious if it is overhung so that it would be difficult to land
on one's feet in case of a fall.
Ac: Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama


********** March 23, 1985
On Saturday, March 23, a group of eleven was caving in Tumbling Rock Cave,
Alabama. At about 3:30 p.m. Amy Wilson (11) stepped between breakdown, fell
over and twisted her ankle. An NSS Board of Governors meeting was in progress
when a call on this cave came in - there was no problem in raising a large crew.
Four and a half hours later the victim had been evacuated.
References:
1) Cheyenne Sweatman Accident Report April 7, 1985, 8 pages.
2) Carl Craig "Rescue at Tumbling Rock" Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 27(9),
September
1985,
p
15.
Analysis: There were four adults with the victim plus seven other juveniles, ages 13
to 17. It is hard to see why they could not at least attempt a self-rescue.
Be: Haddox Pit, Alabama


********** March 24, 1985
At around 3:30 p.m. two cavers entered Haddox Pit on King Drake Mountain in
Alabama. They descended the first 80-foot drop and looked around a bit, then tried
to exit. Donna Knoke (21) was unable to climb out with the knot rig available and so
her companion went for help.
The call went to HMCRS and at 6:30 p.m. they called cavers to assist. A caver
descended and rigged a Jumar set-up which the victim used to ascend successfully.
References:
1) Don Francis "Haddox Pit Again?' Huntsville Grotto Newsletter April 1985, p 31.
2) Ed. "Rescued from Pit" The Huntsville Times March 25, 1985.
Analysis: Descending a pit without knowing if you can get out again perhaps her
companion talked her into it. In either case, very irresponsible.
BI: Anderson [Lake Purdy] Cave, Alabama
March 1985
At about 2:30 p.m. one Monday afternoon in late March five cavers aged 14 to 20,
entered Anderson Cave near Lake Purdy in Alabama. After exploring for some
time, they became lost. Two of the group became separated from the others. Finally
those two found a mud-sculpted dragon that, as a landmark, told them where the
entrance lay. At 7:45 p.m. the two emerged and alerted authorities of their
companions predicament. The others, ages 14, 17, and 18, were found and guided
from the cave, emerging at 3:30 a.m. Tuesday.
Reference: Several news clippings reprinted in Birmingham Grotto Newsletter May
1985, p 4-5.
Analysis: Saved by a mud-snoid! No one outside had any idea where they had gone.
Cc: Up and Down Cave, Kentucky


********** April 6, 1985
On April 6, three cavers were exploring in Up and Down Cave, Rockcastle
County, Kentucky. To get to the bottom of a pit the group descended an adjacent

---------- Page 6 ----------
70-foot, narrow chimney. Two of the group got down quickly and went off to check
out leads, out of voice communication with the third. The latter, Christine Gerace,
was descending this chimney and in a place where she had to traverse over a place
too narrow to get through. She slipped and became wedged at the chest, breaking
three ribs. Her breathing was greatly restricted and was growing increasingly
difficult. There were no footholds or handholds within reach. She shouted to no
avail. Finally she was able to throw r-pack strap over a projection and pull herself
up. Unable to convince her companions that she was injured, and in a state of
shock, she continued to cave for awhile before the group left the cave.
Reference: Gary O'Dell Personal Communication undated.
Analysis: As O'Dell stresses, a party is much less safe if it does not stay together.
This is especially true if the last person is left behind and at especially hazardous
points, like a drop or breakdown area. This victim could easily have been a fatality.
Surely one of the most important rules in group caving is: Keep track of the
person behind you.
Ac: Stillhouse [Falls] Cave, AL


********** May 4, 1985
On May 4 a group of five college students were visiting fellow student John
Graham at his home near Stevenson, Alabama. About a quarter-mile from the
house is a large horseshoe-shaped sink with walls up to fifty feet high. A stream
cascades over the high side and flows into Stillhouse Cave. The cave is an easy walk
down one side of the sink. The site is very scenic and popular with locals. None of
the students were cavers nor had any caving equipment.
At about 5:15 p.m. the group was scattered about the vicinity of the falls when
one, Curtis Mills (early twenties), said he was going to the bathroom and walked
down the sink and into the cave. A few minutes later, John Graham, standing at the
cave entrance, hear a "big slap." He called to Mills but there was no reply.
The cave has a walk-in entrance fifteen by ten feet high; a short way in it turns to
the right and drops over a thirty foot free-fall pit. The outside light was growing dim
at this time of day and the pit could not be seen. The floor is a relatively smooth
streambed, free of obstacles. Graham entered and called again - still no answer.
Though at first he though it might be a joke, he couldn't find Mills SO he told the
rest of the group and he and a companion ran back to the house and got a flashlight.
The light showed Mills at the bottom of the pit, inert, in the spray of the waterfall.
Graham ran back to the house and called the Stevenson Police.
This produced several ambulances, several law-enforcement agencies, the
Scottsboro Fire Department, and the Sand Mountain Rescue Team. The first
paramedic reached Mills at 7:10 p.m. He was unconscious and severely
hypothermic. He was quickly evacuated, loaded in a helicopter and flown twenty
minutes to a hospital in Huntsville (reached at 9:02 p.m.). He was found to have
suffered a skull fracture and injured hand and his body temperature had slipped to
80 degrees F. He recovered.
References:
1) Carl Craig Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 27(8) August 1985 p 63.
2) Carl Craig Personal Communications March 7, 1986 3 pp.
Analysis: After being treated for hypothermia Mills was in neurological intensive
care for ten days. He was hospitalized for another 11 days and spent the summer
undergoing speech and physical therapy. After six months he was still not 1001/2.
He remembered nothing of the accident. He apparently stepped over the drop
totally unaware of it. He is lucky to have survived.
Ac: Cave in Deep Creek Canyon, Colorado


********** June 8, 1985
On Saturday, June 8, six cavers were checking leads in a cliff in Jackass Canyon
(Lower Deep Creek Canyon) in western Colorado. They were preparing to check a
couple of holes midway down a 211-foot cliff, directly across from Twenty Pound
Tick Cave. It was hot and windy and their approach had been long and difficult. One
caver traversed around to the bottom to get water and act as a spotter in helping
line up the rappel.
A 300-foot 11-mm regular PMI was rigged, anchored to a juniper tree, and
thrown over the edge. A spotter 400 feet away along the top of the cliff could see it
had hung up on a ledge 134 feet down. They had a coil of manila rope with a
grappling hook attached to facilitate reaching the leads.
The first rappeller found the rope to be too far to one side of the nearest lead to
attempt entry, so continued down and communicated to the top. All would descend
but one, who would reposition the rope. Two more descended, one experiencing
control problems on the fast rope, having to put the rope around his body to get
enough friction on his carabiner/brake bar setup. Those below thought he was just
fooling around.
Deb Glaser (32) came next, at about 3:30 p.m. on a double carabiner/brake bar
rig. She proceeded under control at first but one third of the way down, where the
drop went free, she yelled and accelerated. Essentially in free-fall, she struck her
behind on a ledge 60 feet further down, then went another 80 feet to the slope at the
bottom. She landed on her left foot, then over onto her back, her feet upslope.
Only her husband Roy Glaser was near, the others having gone to the stream for
water. He ran over and found her trying to de-rig from the rope - "Get this thing
off me!" She had a four by eight inch hole in her left shin where ends of broken
bone and ripped muscle could be seen. A lot of blood was on her coveralls and the
ground around. The others arrived a minute later. Her "eyelids, fingernails and
lips were grey-colored." She had already moved around a bit so they did not fear
spinal damage. As they moved her out of the sun she nearly fainted. One went for
water, another back to the trucks to call in a helicopter and another wrapped a pack
strap around her lower thigh to slow the bleeding.
After half an hour the victim complained of pain and was given the six aspirin
tablets available. At 5:45 EMT's with a stretcher, medical supplies and a radio
arrived. The patient was now in extreme pain. At 6 p.m. the Flight-for-Life
helicopter from Denver arrived and hovered while two nurses got out and started
IV's and oxygen for the victim. The chopper found a place to land one-half mile
away. The victim, after first aid, was carried there in a Stokes litter. At 8:15 she was
on her way to the hospital.
The victim underwent three rounds of surgery and was expected to make a 95
percent recovery in a year's time.
References:
1) Roy Glaser "Accident Report: Deep Creek Canyon" Rocky Mountain Caving
Summer 1985, pp 31-33.
2)
Debbie
Glaser
Personal
Communication
March
27,
1986.
Analysis: Roy Glaser cites himself for failing to give a bottom belay. Debbie Glaser
names "ignorance and a failure to react to the situation correctly. She found PMI
regular to "behave differently from the alpine-type ropes" she had rappelled on for
the previous two years. She knew what to do but "panicked and went into shock
instead."
When one rappels, they are, by the nature of the activity, on their own. One
cannot expect all ropes to have similar friction in a given rappel device and one
cannot expect bottom belays since this usually exposes the belayer to rockfall. If the
rappel is rigged at an anchor back from the edge, one should get on and test the
friction before going over. If friction is insufficient, stop immediately into the rappel
and devise more friction. A rappeller should know that the friction decreases as the
weight of the rope decreases, and be prepared for this. I would expect 11mm PMI
regular to be slow in a double carbiner brake bar setup, but perhaps the rope was
new.
It may be that Glaser's judgement was impaired by dehydration from the hot hike
but she denies this, saying she drank all her water before rappelling.
De: Bird Horror Hole, Alabama


********** June 8, 1985
On June 8, a group of eight experienced cavers was in Bird Horror Hole, Jackson
County, Alabama for a push trip. They came to a virgin waterfall drop and rigged it.
Tina Shirk descended and found the rope to be too short. She tried to change over
and ascend but "somehow her rack jammed into an ascender and could not be
moved.' Communication was impossible but after a time a second rope was rigged
and a companion descended. He apparently got her switched over to his rope and
down to the bottom. The rest descended but Shirk was suffering a bit from
hypothermia so she was escorted out.
Reference: Glenn Lemasters "Bird Horror Hole - The History and Exploration"
CIG Newsletter February 1986, p 28.
Analysis: It is great to experience a virgin pit but one should be well practiced in the
vertical arts. The first person down a pit should always expect the unexpected.
Dc: Natural Bridge of the Rogue River, Oregon


********** June 23, 1985
On June 23, two girls were sitting at the edge of the Blowhole, on the Natural
Bridge of the Rogue River north of Medford, Oregon. The Natural Bridge, a tourist
attraction, is where the upper Rogue River enters a lava cave for some 225 feet.
Even in the summer this cave is completely filled with raging water. The Blowhole
is an opening from the surface into the flow of the underground river. It is flat all
around the hole, which is some eight feet across, and the water level is only a
couple of feet below the edge.
The girls, 12 and 19 years of age, were dangling their feet in the frothing water
and remarking how similar it looked to an oversized washing machine, when the 12

---------- Page 7 ----------
year old suddenly fell in. Her companion made a grab for her but fell in also. They
were immediately washed into the cave and maintained contact for a moment, then
were separated. The older one soon shot out into a still pool about thirty feet away
where part of the river emerges and the main bridge ends. The twelve year old
came out one-eighth mile downstream in a gorge but was retrieved alive,
apparently by tourists. These were the first persons ever to pass through the cave
alive.
Reference: Norm Grennell, Resource Assistant, Prospect Ranger District, Rogue
River National Forest Personal Communication October 1985.
Analysis: One must have great respect for churning, heavily flowing water. The
survival of these two is a remarkable coincidence.
FD: Madison Blue Spring, Florida
Summer 1985
Three divers were diving in Madison Blue Spring one evening. One was suffering
from a cold but had taken decongestants to clear his ears. Just inside, the primary
light source of this diver failed. About 600 feet in, that diver's second light began to
dim, so a partner loaned his second source and all continued. At 1200 feet they
turned back. They then spread out so that they were not inter-visible.
At a necessary descent, the diver with a cold couldn't equalize pressure in his
ears SO continued in extreme pain. He spotted a dome and, unknown to the others,
left the line and ascended the 15 feet to the ceiling hoping the air pressure change
would help. He had been the middle man, but before he was ready to continue, the
last diver, the reel man, swam past. The sick diver was thus left without a line and
with a light too dim to signal with. Fortunately his ears had cleared and he was able
to catch up. Surprisingly, he survived the dive.
Reference: Randy Bohrer "Cutting Corners" Underwater Speleology 12(6) October
16, 1985, p 5.
Analysis: Bohrer gives the obvious tips: "Don't cut corners on health, lights and
party coherence.' The sick diver was in special danger - he hadn't dived the cave
before and would have had a hard time finding the way if he hadn't caught right up.
It was night and no light showed from the entrance. Both companions thought
everything was OK and wouldn't have missed him until too late. He had a dim light
and no line.
Bf: Donaldson/Bronson Cave, Indiana


********** July 1, 1985
On Monday morning July 1, Michael Hall (25) and Roman Lazowski (24)
approached Bronson Cave in Spring Hill Park near Bloomington, Indiana. It had
rained steadily all night Sunday and was still raining as the two entered Bronson
Cave, a stream inlet. Lazowski had been in the cave on previous occasions. They
were dressed in shorts and tennis shoes and each carried a flashlight - their
intention was to traverse underground to the Donaldson Cave entrance, which was
the outlet for the stream entering Bronson Cave.
About halfway through they saw their first serious rapids, waist deep, which they
"rode" for a few minutes. They came to a "humongous" rapids, where they tried
to turn back but were prevented by the force of the flow.
They proceeded downstream but immediately lost control; Lazowski was swept
downstream but grabbed a ledge and called back to Hall. Hall jumped into the
water but was swept past Lazowski, "his flashlight sticking up out of the
water
his body went under." Hall was battered against the walls. Fortunately they
were only 300 feet from the Donaldson entrance at that point and, 30 seconds later,
Hall came washing out into daylight. He grabbed a railing and pulled himself out of
the water. After finding his shorts which had been torn off by the force of the flow,
he sought help. At a hospital he was treated for bruises, cuts and a chipped elbow.
Thinking his companion had drowned, Lazowski decided to stay put in the 54
degree cave. A few feet above the water he found a crevice with a six inch ledge. He
had had survival training when a Marine and was determined to survive. On his
ledge he had to constantly turn from side to side. Every once in a while he would
move about but never found a stable position; he was always using something -
elbows, knees, head - to hold himself in position. He yelled from time to time and
was afraid to sleep - he might fall into the water or miss a rescuer. But he didn't
give up. Time passed
Meanwhile rescuers assembled - crews of cavers and numerous emergency
service personnel. Because of Hall's emergence, they knew Lazowski was near the
Donaldson entrance to the system. Yet the high water discouraged entry and
intermittant rain kept the levels up. A canine unit was used to search downstream
from the entrance in case Lazowski had washed out unnoticed.
A party of wetsuited rescuers entered Bronson but could proceed only 600 to 800
feet before being stopped by the water flow. Early Tuesday another party entered
Donaldons but could go only about 100 feet upstream, before being stopped by the
current, at a place where the ceiling dropped almost to water level.
Tuesday night teams attempted to dig into Donaldson from an adjacent cave, to
no avail. Another effort managed to drill into the passage from above.
Early on Wednesday rescuers in Donaldson were at the low ceiling when a light
shown through brought a shout from Lazowski. The body recovery had turned back
into a rescue! Lazowski was told to remain calm, conserve his energy and wait -
the water was still too high. Voice contact was maintained using a bullhorn.
At around 5 p.m. Steve Collins was able to make it up through the low spot and
get to Lazowski. Collins was on the other side of the stream from the victim and had
to wait for a rope to be brought up. He then threw one end to Lazowski who wearily
tied it to a rock on his side. As Lazowski was brought across the stream, the piton on
the near side gave and both were swept away, Collins caught by the attachment on
the far side, the victim by rescuers downstream.
Lazowski was fitted with a wetsuit top and helmet and hauled to the top of the
crevice above the stream and passed via a tyrolean traverse to the entrance (8
p.m.). He was hospitalized for several days for hypothermia and dehydration but
otherwise suffered only cuts and bruises. He had been trapped for 55 hours.
References:
1) Judith Egerton "Cave floodwaters in Indiana thwart search for missing man"
Louisville Courier-Journal July 3, 1985, p 1.
2) Judith Egerton "Rescue teams pull Hoosier from Cave" ibid. July 4, 1985 p 1.
3) Judith Egerton "Man trapped in cave conquered panic just before rescue" ibid.
July 5, 1985, p 1.
4) William Sedivy "Enlightening" The Indianapolis Star July 5, 1985, p 1.
5) Mark Nichols and Kitty Unthank "Caver rescued after 55 hours" The
Indianapolis Star July 4, 1985, p 1.
6) Steve Collins "An account of Donaldson's Cave Rescue" CIG Newsletter
[Central Indiana Grotto] August 1985, pp 110-113.
7) AP "Will to live saved ex-Marine in cave" Indianapolis News July 4, 1985, p 23.
8) George Dasher "Rocking Chair" The West Virginia Caver 3(4) August 1985, p
10.
9) Ed. "Rescuers speak with man in cave" Indianapolis News July 3, 1985.
Analysis: Let no one mistake the message here - Lazowski lived because he was
determined to do SO. With no food or water in a constantly hypothermiating
situation for 55 hours and being chilled by his trip into the cave, there seems to be
no physiological reason not to succumb to hypothermia. Yet he lived. Survival is not
just a matter of knowing what to do, but also in being determined to do it - to
persevere.
According to newsclippings, Lazowski kept his mind occupied, kept thinking 'I
can't let this cave beat me." He began hallucinating and carried on a conversation
with an imaginary companion, discussing the attributes of the New York and
Indiana NBA draft choices. His leg "fell asleep" once and he banged on it for some
time before regaining feeling. He was afraid to sleep but became very tired and
must have dozed - when he did he would "wake himself and just scream - 'Help,
I'm still here!'.' But he never gave up.
F: Little River Springs, Florida


********** September 22, 1985
In late September two groups of divers were at Little River Springs in Florida.
One was a NSS-certified group, the other, poorly equipped, was not. The NSSer's
tried to warn the open-water trained group about cave diving but with little success.
The NSS group had done its dive and was decompressing when the four others
entered. After a while the four surfaced and three decided to go in a second time.
At "Table Rock'' they realized they were low on air-gauge readings; between 400
and 900 psi. They reportedly headed out "every man for himself." At the end of the
permanent line one swam up into a dome area instead of turning right to go out of
the cave.
One NSS diver was still in compression in ten feet of water when he observed "an
enormous silt cloud" preceding the retreating divers. One surfaced with no air, the
other with 50 psi. It wasn't clear in the silt that only two had exited, but the victim
party knew and one went right back in with the fourth man's tank and soon came
back out with the body of the third diver.
References:
1) Ed. "Little River Drowning" Underwater Speleology 12(6), October 16, 1985, p
10.
2) Don Landis "Little River Drowning: an eye-witness account" ibid. 13(1) January
8, 1986, p 4.
Analysis: The victim group was not equipped for cave diving. They had only one
light per man, didn't run a continuous guideline and didn't plan their air supply
properly. Worse, they laughed at warnings.

---------- Page 8 ----------
In areas like Florida, perhaps it would be possible to make cave training part of a
diver's overall certification? Landis suggests "the no-light rule for open-water
divers acts as a natural deterrent, preventing penetration into a cave beyond one's
ability and training."
F: Spring Run [Patters Spring] Cave, Florida


********** October 3, 1985
At 1:30 p.m. on Thursday, October 3, George Matthews (22) and John Horton
entered the underwater cave at Spring Run in Washington County, Florida.
Matthews was certified open water and had logged eleven dives; his companion
had no experience or formal training. Neither had experience or training in cave
diving. They had only one low power light and 80 cubic foot tank with no second
stage regulators, each.
They penetrated 300 feet and to 80 feet in depth in very silty conditions without a
guideline. They turned back, Horton signaling to Matthews to lead out. Matthews
was quickly lost from sight. Horton swam "frantically" toward the entrance,
frequently running into walls. He found a fixed line and followed it to a "I"
junction from which the light of the entrance can be seen. He surfaced with only 500
psi in his tank.
Matthews body was located on Friday at 12:45, 249 feet in and 70 feet down, on
the third recovery attempt.
References:
1) Derek Kinner "Man drowns in cave" newsclipping from Panama City, Florida
newspaper.
2) Wayne McKinnon "Accident Report" unpublished, 6 pages, undated.
Analysis: Inexperienced, untrained divers, poorly equipped, extending themselves
much too far.
F: Ebro Blue Springs, Florida


********** October 3, 1985
At around noon on Thursday, October 3, George Alvin Matthews (22) and a
friend (22) went diving in Ebro Springs in Florida. Both had become open-water
certified two months previously. They were wearing single tanks, with single
regulators and had only one light each. Neither had received any cave diving
training.
After 10 or 15 minutes, they were on their way out and got separated. Matthews
apparently became disoriented and drowned when his air ran out. The body was
later recovered by two divers from the Sheriff's rescue team from Washington
County, Florida. A TV video report showed the rescue divers to be improperly
cave-equipped and the victim to be equipped with snorkel, weight belt, and fins
that were not taped.
Reference: John Crea "Ebro Springs Drowning" Underwater Speleology October
16, 1985, p 3.
Analysis: Those outside the caving community will seek adventure with poor
equipment and know-how. both in air and water-filled caves. Unfortunately their
mistakes cost lives and access. The Sheriff involved here spoke of closing the spring
by blasting.
Bc: W. V. Cave, West Virginia


********** October 19, 1985
On October 19, three cavers were in W. Cave in West Virginia. They were in
a large room about 350 feet below and 2,000 feet horizontally from the entrance, to
check a lead at the upper end of the room where water cascades into breakdown.
The room is entered via an ascent up a steep, hard, slick mud slope where footholds
had been cut several years earlier.
The lead didn't go SO they headed back. Mike Dyas (42) was the first going down
the mud slope, "in a partially sitting position, feeling for the footsteps and
intending to slowly 'crab walk down." Just after starting, however, he lost his
footing and slid rapidly down, feet first, for 100 feet. At that point the slope
becomes nearly vertical, dropping a final twenty feet into a room, and Dyas was
able to stop by hitting a bulge in the wall that formed the ceiling over the mud
slope. He absorbed most of the force with his legs but he rebounded to the right,
catching himself on the right wall with that hand, injuring his wrist.
His companions helped him down and one, a paramedic, examined him and
believed the wrist to be dislocated. It was bound with strips of nylon torn from a
pack. Since Dyas was not in shock and otherwise uninjured, they decided to proceed
out.
The way out involved "a dozen or so dmarginally free-climbable, not-quite-
vertical pitches, followed by a series of tight breakdown squeezes near the
surface." Dyas had no use of this right arm but was able to get out under his own
power with occasional boosts from his companions and belays or Texas ascent up
the vertical places. They got out three to four hours after the accident. The wrist
was found to have multiple fractures requiring a full arm cast for several weeks.
Reference: Mike Dyas "W. V.'s Cave, West Virginia" unpublished report,
undated, 1 p.
Analysis: The group was fortunate to have an extra rope to use for belay on the way
out. The cave stream was nearly dry SO they could follow it out - a more direct
route than otherwise. Dyas was lucky to have stopped his fall before the bottom,
possibly avoiding worse injury.
Dyas attributes the slip to "simple carelessness and bad luck" rather than to
fatigue or cold, though he admits to being "slightly damp and cold at the time." He
believes he was "slightly off the 'trail'' when he started and missed the first of the
footholds.
Hard mud banks offer no penetration to flailing hands or feet and must be
respected when negotiated for any distance vertically. The cavers here might have
used a handline but since they didn't, it is up ot them to exercise great care and
exactitude in climbing the mud pitch. When you choose not to belay, you can't
afford to fall. In any case my hat is always off to cavers who do a self-rescue; in this
case an outside rescue would have been very difficult and drawn-out.
AAr: Fullers Cave, West Virginia


********** November 28, 1985
At around 3:45 p.m. on November 28, a group of seven cavers entered the Fullers
Entrance of the Culverson Creek Cave, a 20.8 mile long system in Greenbrier
County, West Virginia. In early November the eastern part of the State had
received record rainfall causing extensive damage and flooding. Greenbrier County
was north of the storm center but received heavy rain also. It had rained the day
before. The group had intended to do Friar's Hole but because of high water had
changed to a cave less likely to flood. None had been in Fullers previously.
The entrance passage is a five to eight foot wide canyon with a six to twelve inch
deep stream flowing swiftly in over small, loose rock slabs. About fifty feet inside is
a boulder five feet high, seven feet long, two feet wide at the top and four to five
feet wide at the bottom, in the center of the passage with the stream flowing by on
the left, looking in. thus the slope of the floor at that point was to the left. The route
past the boulder was either walking in the stream to the left with the narrowest
point being some two feet wide, or climbing over the lower slope of the rock where
it neared the wall on the right. The left-hand route was thus a corridor between the
vertical wall of the rock and the vertical wall of the cave.
At 3:50 p.m. three cavers passed this rock and three more were in the process -
two on the left with Eric Tsakle (26) in the lead and one to the right. As Tsakle
reached the center of the boulder, it suddenly tilted to the left. They tried to stop it
and failed, leaving Tsakle pinned by his head in a standing position. "His left
temporal area and shoulder were against the wall and his right cheekbone against
the rock; his feet were on the floor. His cap-type hard hat with chin strap was on
his head but not in contact with either the rock or the wall. The boulder's in-cave
edge and top hit the wall, stopping its movement with Tsakle's head in a five to six
inch space, with greater space below.
One caver immediately left for help while four others futily tried to move the
boulder. Then one supported Tsakle from below while three companions searched
the entrance sink for something to serve as a lever. Some old truck parts failed in
this regard SO one caver was sent for a hydraulic auto jack; another went to call the
Eastern Region Cave Rescue Network (at 4:10 p.m.).
Tsakle lost consciouness within thirty seconds of the rockfall and ceased moving
after about one minute. At 3:59 John Evans, one of the victim's party, noted that
Taskle's pulse was strong, he was unconscious and there was a trickle of blood from
his left nostril.
At about 4:20 the hydraulic jack arrived and with this and crowbars they were
able to move the boulder Tsakle was carefully moved to the first dry spot, about
twenty feet away, and CPR was begun. The Renick Rescue Squad arrived and a
paramedic took over CPR at 4:29. Tsakle was evacuated by stretcher at 5:25 and
reached a hospital by ambulance at 6:02. Enroute IV's were established and cardiac
drugs administered, without success. He was pronounced dead at 6:05 p.m.
References:
1) Jerry Kyle "Caving Accident in Fullers Cave" undated, 3 pp.
2) AP "Boulder Kills Man Inside Cave" The Inter-Mountain (Elkins, WV)
December 3, 1985.
3) George Dasher Personal Communication January 12, 1986, 2 pp.
4) John Evans "Accident at Fuller Cave" NSS News February 1986, p 40; also in
NSS
News November 1986

---------- Page 9 ----------
Massachusetts Caver 3(5) November-December 1985, p 3.
5) Bob Warshaw "Fatal Accident in Fullers Cave, WV" Massachusetts Caver 3(5)
November-December 1985, p 4-5.
Analysis: Eric Tsakle was killed in one of those accidents over which one has little
control - he was apparently in the wrong place at a particular instant of time. His
companions, courageous in working under a now obviously unstable boulder, did
everything they could; this had to be heartbreaking for them. Cave rescuers were
very fast onto the scene, to no avail.
In the shining light of hindsight, there is perhaps something meaningful to note.
To paraphrase John Evans, caves should never be regarded as stable and
unchangable; the recent flooding would certainly leave its mark on a cave. New
instabilities should be expected. The safer caver will be one who expects the
unexpected. If it were in any way apparent that a boulder could move, and if so
would move to the left, then the caver who chose to pass it on the right would be the
safer caver. In this case, no caver noticed any instability.
The boulder in this case was very massive and probably no helmet would have
saved Tsakle. A skull can be fractured by much less weight, however, and cavers
should be encouraged to use helmets with strength in all directions - it could save
your life.
F: Ponce de Leon Springs, Florida


********** December 29, 1985
On Sunday, December 29 a group of three divers entered Ponce de Leon Springs
in Volusia County, Florida. Only two were able to squeeze past the gate, however,
and the other had to turn back. The two did not return. They were found later by
NSS-CDS divers some 150 feet past the gate.
Reference: Ed. "Double Drowning at Ponce de Leon Springs" Underwater
Speleology 13(1), January 8, 1986, p 3.
Analysis: The divers reportedly had less than the bare minimum of equipment for
even open-water diving.
ADDITIONAL INCIDENTS:
De: Lookout Mountain Caverns, Tennessee


********** December 9, 1984
Nine cavers entered the cave via a new elevator, getting off at the Lookout
Mountain Caverns level at -420 feet. When they returned three hours later, they
were informed by intercom that the elevator was out of order. The natural entrance
had been sealed off by construction so a twenty minute wait was necessary for the
elevator problems to be corrected. (Gary Soule, Personal Communication
December 23, 1984).
DI: Mammoth Cave System, Kentucky
August 1984
Two cavers attempted the near-sump at the upstream end of Logsdon River in the
Roppel Section of Mammoth. In the 30 foot wide passage the ceiling comes very
close to the water surface as far as one can see. The cavers worked their way along
to only one and a half inches of air space but could find no way to continue. One lost
his way in the wide, featureless pool and exited the wrong way. He reached no air
space, then a mud bank which told him which way to go. It was a close call indeed.
They decided that such sump pushing was close enough to real cave diving to
demand cave diving safety practices, such as a line to define their route. (Ed. "Low
Air Space Adventures" CKKC Newsletter Spring-Summer 1985).
Bx: Lon Odell Memorial Cave, Missouri
Winter, 1985
A caver, exhausted from other struggles in the cave was unable to climb the fifty
foot entrance pit cable ladder. She was pulled up with the belay rope tied around
her waist. There were numerous delays due to the pain of the rope or when she
became caught in the narrow cleft of the upper 25 feet of the drop. (Jon Beard, Trip
Report, Ozarks Underground Winter, 1985).
De: Unnamed Pit, Tennessee[?]


********** February 6, 1985
A caver was climbing a free 160 foot pit using a Mitchell (high and low Jumars
with a Gossett box). One hundred feet up his lower Jumar sling came untied. He
406 NSS News November 1986
was suspended from his other Jumar, whose sling was badly worn! Fortunately he
had a third Jumar which he rapidly applied. The sling re-tied, he continued up.
Note that when you tie up a vertical rig, you should wet the knots and apply stress
to "set" the knot. A knot properly set should not come untied. Some knots do not
set well, however, and some sling rope is too stiff to allow setting. In this case one
can fasten the loose ends to prevent untying. As this caver (Johnson) points out:
always wear chicken loops, always inspect your gear before using it, and a Mitchell
isn't really complete unless the ascenders are safetied to a seat harness. (Larry
Johnson Personal Communication undated).
De: Dante's Descent, Arizona


********** February 24, 1985
On a trip to Dante's Descent, two ropes were used and two cavers ascended each.
A pad protected an obvious abrasion point. When the ropes were hauled up one had
a large hole in the sheath through which the core protruded. It had been noticed
that this fray was occurring just below the pad. It is surmised the "bouncing"
during ascent caused the pad to move up and down with the "bounce," thus
exposing the rope to the abrasion point. Much apparently unavoidable rockfall was
also experienced.
Two thoughts: Some abrasion points are best handled with a hammer; that is,
take a hammer and dull a sharp edge. Second, it is perhaps most efficient to set up
a rhythmic "bounce" as you ascend, but it is definitely a potentially dangerous
thing to do. The "bounce" can be damped if you think about it and break your
rhythm. (Barbara am Ende Personal Communication undated).
Dr: Mushroom Cave, Missouri


********** March 9, 1985
On a survey trip, Tim Harrison had a close call when a 300 pound boulder moved
onto his foot. Fortunately no bones were broken. (MSS Liaison May, 1985).
Df: Mill Creek Cave, Tennessee
March 1985
Two cavers entered Mill Creek Cave on an overcast day. Two hours later they
returned to the entrance room to find the entrance sumped. They had a 19 hour wait
for the flood to recede enough to allow them to exit. (Speleonews June 1985, p 59).
Df: Sotano San Agustin, Oaxaca, Mexico
April 1985
On a long day trip into Sotano San Agustin a group ran into flooding conditions
while trying to exit. Three cavers of the group had to wait for nine and a half hours
for the flood to recede before proceeding. The trip out was made through high
water conditions. (Keith Goggin "News from Huautla" Carbide Dump [Blue Ridge
Grotto] 20(2), May 1985, p 46).
DI: Cueva de Rio Talgua, Department of Olancha, Honduras


********** April 14, 1985
A group of Peace Corps volunteers decided to go caving after attending a
wedding. The thirteen cavers had eight flashlights. They explored the cave for
some time but when they exited, there were only twelve. They re-entered and found
the missing caver asleep at the back of the cave. Alcohol may have had something
to do with this. (Larry Cohen Personal Communication April 25, 1985).
Dc: Buckner's Cave, Indiana


********** April 27, 1985
A group including a number of 14 16 year olds were approaching the Volcano
Room in Buckner's when four of the kids started to run up the ledge at the top of the
Volcano. One failed to see a drop and ran off it, falling 6 to 8 feet and rolling down
the gravel slope below. He was unhurt. (Jonathan Genmick "Caving With
Pathfinders" The Underground Movement 2(3), April 1985).
Cc: Un-named Ice Cave, California
May 1985
While exploring a lava tube ice cave a caver declined to wear gloves "because they
interfered with her grip." She slipped on the ice and sustained a serious gash on a
hand. It was pointed out that a hand injury can be permanently crippling if nerves
or tendons are severed. (Ed. "Disaster of the Month" SFBC Newsletter March,
1986).

---------- Page 10 ----------
Dr: Wayne's Lost Cave, Indiana


********** May 11, 1985
A group of five cavers was exploring in Wayne's Lost Cave near Bloomington,
Indiana. In the RPI passage, one caver began a five foot climb over a breakdown
slab; another caver, Jeff Woolever (30), began to traverse a narrow walking height
crevice beneath this slab. Suddenly the upper caver dislodged a 200 to 250 pound
rock which fell five feet, striking Woolever on the left thigh, knocking him to the
wall. He was carried to a flat area and checked for injury. After a short recovery, he
left the cave under his own power. (Dave Green "Accident Report" January 2,
1986, 2 pp.).
Ac: Norman Cave, West Virginia
May 1985
On the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend a group had just entered Norman Cave,
Greenbrier County, West Virginia when a caver fell from the top of the Waterfall,
injuring his elbow. He was assisted back out of the cave. (George Dasher "Rocking
Chair' The West Virginia Caver 3(4) August 1985, p 10).
BI: Cave near San Antonio, Texas
June 1985
Three kids found a cave about five miles north of San Antonio and, inspired by
the movie "Goonies," headed in to find treasure. They were unable to get out and
after one of their mothers alerted authorities, the kids were rescued by cavers.
(Editorial Texas Caver August 1985).
B: Indian Grave Point Cave, Tennessee


********** June 11, 1985
On Tuesday, June 11, three cavers entered Indian Grave Point Cave in DeKalb
County, Tennessee. Previous to this, one of the group, David Warner (19) had
injured an arm. After caving for a while, the injured arm lost some of its function
and Warner was unable to proceed over breakdown and up handlines. His
companions found their way out and reported Warner's predicament to the Sheriff.
Unfortunately they were unfamiliar with the cave and could not lead the authorities
to Warner. Cavers were able to question the two and guess the appropriate part of
the cave to search. Sure enough, Warner was found in the Schoolhouse Passage
and assisted out of the cave. (DeKalb County Sheriff's Office, Smithville, TN,
"Accident Report" undated).
Dr: Vinegar Ridge Cave, Kentucky
June 1985
While exiting after pushing a new lead, one caver was traversing a canyon
floored with large breakdown when the floor decided to settle. The caver stayed on
top of the descending pile and was unhurt. Later a caver was at the top of a pit,
ascending and just going over the lip when a rock dislodged. This was not noticed
by the climber, but it struck a companion who was at the bottom on the opposite
side of the pit, adjusting her seat harness. She was hit on the top of the helmet (Joe
Brown) and knocked down but not injured. (Carol Veseley The Explorer [So. Calif.
Grotto] September 1985, p 107).
De: Hall's Pit, Kentucky


********** June 28, 1985
At a 25 foot pit the rope was rigged to a pillar of limestone about ten inches
square and twenty inches high, three feet off the floor. The first caver to descend
pulled on the rope, tied to this, with all his weight. It seemed secure. When he
rigged in for rappel and leaned back over the edge of the drop, he paused and still it
looked OK. When he took a step downward, the top of the pillar began to tip, a
companion yelled "Stop!"; and the rigging point fell apart. The rappeller reacted
instantly, throwing out his arms and catching himnself at the edge on his elbows.
He scrambled to safety. (Jay Arnold "A Simple Little Caving Trip" D. C.
Speleograph August 1985, p 11).
De: Soldier's Cave, California
Summer 1985
On a trip to Soldier's Cave two incidents occurred. First, a four D-cell battery
pack became too hot to touch when the new cells leaked and shorted out. Battery
fluid got on the caver's clothes and caused a burn. the second was on the ascent of
the 70 foot pit when a homemade chest box popped open and in the process,
abraded the webbing attached to an ascender completely through. The box was
similar to a double Simmons roller - pull a quick release pin and the rollers are
free and the slings or rope come out the front. in this case it appears the roller on
the webbing side did not fit its slot and the edge of the webbing was able to work
into the gap, abrading itself and pushing the pin out. Webbing is not a good item
where abrasion is concerned, since it is woven (all strands come to the surface) and
loses its strength quickly with abrasion. Better to use static kernmantle. (Carol
Veseley "Soldier's Cave: Two close calls on our first grotto trip" Better Caves and
Sinkholes [Santa Barbara Underground Grotto] Summer 1985 p 7-8).
Dr: Devil's Hole, Missouri


********** July 7, 1985
On July 7 two cavers were doing Devil's Hole in southwest Missouri. When
rigged, the rope lay in a narrow fissure about 90 feet above the bottom. The more
experienced caver ascended first and got off the rope onto a two foot wide ledge just
above the narrow place to help the other if he needed it. His companion needed no
help, however, and SO was instructed to proceed up. When he got 25 feet higher he
dislodged a football-sized rock. This was not noticed by the climber SO no warning
shout was made. The rock grazed the face of the caver on the ledge, hit the Jumar
on his chest and landed partly on one foot before continuing down the pit. There
was no injury. As Stock points out: 1) The caver on the ledge should have been
attached to the rope, 2) The climber should have been more aware, and 3) When
you are caving with someone you can't depend on, you might be safer caving alone.
I
would emphasize that when you have to climb above a companion who can't get
out of your rockfall path, you simply cannot allow rocks to dislodge. If you see it will
occur no matter what you do, then you must stop and warn him. (Mark Stock
"Personal Communication" July 15, 1985).
Cc: Thornhill Cave, Kentucky


********** July 20, 1985
A group of five cavers was in Thornhill Cave with the objective of surveying when
Paul Weierbach slipped in a particularly muddy spot, fell backward and landed on
one hand, injuring his wrist. They decided it was broken SO he was accompanied out
of the cave. It was broken. (Fort Knox Grotto Low Crawler August 1985).
Dr: Bad Medicine Cave, Wyoming


********** July 29, 1985
While pushing an upstream boulder choke, a large rockfall occurred nearly
crushing one caver. (The Explorer [So. Calif. Grotto] September 1985, p 108].
BI: Avondale Cave, Alabama
August 1985
In August two teenagers were in Avondale Cave and became lost. They
apparently were expected back and were reported overdue to authorities. Cavers
arrived and soon located the boys who had been in the cave some five hours. (Ed.
"Trip Reports" Birmingham Grotto Newsletter September, 1985).
Ci: Rimstone River Cave, Missouri


********** August 3, 1985
A group spent 16 hours in Rimstone River Cave, Perry County, Missouri on
August 3. During the trip they discovered they had been in water just downstream
of a decaying dead deer. For one caver, at least, this included a duckunder
requiring getting one ear in the contaminated water. After arriving home, this
caver found he had a scrape on the shin. The next morning it was badly infected. He
also had an ear infection and "dermatomycosis," and was on antibiotics for five
weeks. A companion on that trip had a similar infection of his left arm from the two
small cuts on his left hand and was on antibiotics for four weeks. Shin infections are
especially nasty since the bone is near the surface and circulation is poor. (Jack
White Egyptian Echo [Little Egypt Student Grotto] Fall 1985).
Do: Mueller Pit, Missouri


********** August 4, 1985
On August 4 a group of cavers explored a pit (Mueller Pit?) near Apple Creek in
Perry County, Missouri. The 82 foot pit proved to have only a short section of
sluggish stream at the bottom-and very bad air. One caver descended and waited
at the bottom of the drop for several minutes. He then walked down a slight slope to
the stream and became so breathless "it was a struggle to get to the rope only
twelve feet away." He had detached his vertical gear and yelled up to send down
cable ladders since he was having trouble getting on rope. Before this could be
done, however, he got on rope and started up, breathing very hard. He made it up.
The air in the pit was still, with no odor and no accumulation of organic debris; the
stream enters via a sump. (Stan Sides Personal Communication September 30,
1985; "Middle Mississippi Grotto" MSS Liaison 25(9) September 1985, p 57).

---------- Page 11 ----------
Dr: Fulford Cave, Colorado
August 1985
On Sunday, August 11, a group of cavers entered Fulford Cave in Colorado. At
about 3 p.m. the entrance which had been dug open and timbered in 1892 by a
miner, collapsed. Fortunately there is another entrance, requiring a 12 foot drop.
This was rigged shortly after and the group exited without further incident. (Ed.
"Fulford Cave Entrance Collapses" Caving in the Rockies Fall 1985).
Df: Mosby Cave, Missouri


********** August 17, 1985
A group of three cavers went to map in Mosby Cave, Clay County, Missouri
during wet weather. The sinkhole entrance was entered but it was apparently
obvious that the cave was flooding. The entrance "snapped shut" five minutes
after they retreated. (MSS Liaison 25(12) December 1985, p 77).
FDh: Simmons Mingo Cave, West Virginia


********** August 24, 1985
A group of three divers, supported by three cavers, was in Simmons Mingo Cave,
Randolf County, West Virginia. they entered via the relatively new Stan's Blowing
Rock Entrance which leads down a 90 foot pit but fairly directly to the upstream
sump of the Canadian River. At the turnaround point of the 15 minute dive, the
diver with the line could not find a good tie-off and so cut the line without tieing it
off. This was apparently induced by hypothermia - since the water was flowing
back toward the start, the line followed the diver back. Also, stirred up silt put
visibility to nothing so the diver had to hand-over-hand back. Twenty feet from the
start he was so tangled in the dive line he had to be cut free by a companion. He had
dropped his knife. When he emerged he was shaking from cold, though he had
been wearing a 1/4-inch wet suit. (Ron Simmons "Upstream Dive in the
Underground Dry Branch'' Ground Hog [Shenandoah Va. Grotto] January 1986).
De: Polygamy's End Cave, Utah


********** September 7, 1985
Four cavers bottomed this cave as practice for a trip to Neff's Canyon. On the way
out, one caver was on the first and longest drop when she noticed the strap for the
foot Gibbs of her 3-Gibbs rope-walker setup was coming undone. The rig was new
for that trip and was poorly adjusted; the knee ascender wasn't pulling up smoothly
and the shoulder ascender was too loose, requiring the use of her arms to remain
upright. At one point, while checking her foot Gibbs, she nearly went upside-down.
Two were already up that drop and aided her ascent by pulling on the rope. The rig
was adjusted and she proceeded out without serious problems. Rockfall was
experienced on other drops. As she says, "Test your equipment before using it in a
cave." (Jean Cassidy "Sweating, Shivering in Polygamy's End" Wasatch Grotto
News Autumn 1985, p 20).
BI: Airman's Cave, Texas


********** September 6, 1985
At about 4 p.m. on Saturday, September 6, Bart Hudson (25) and David
Hopingardner (24) entered Airman's Cave on Barton Creek near Austin, Texas.
They only planned on a short visit but became lost. When they hadn't returned that
evening their wives notified the authorities who contacted Bill Russell, the mapper
of the cave. They were found thirty feet from the entrance, still lost, about 2 a.m.
Sunday. (Jay Jorden "Dispatches" Habla la Abuela del Oztotl Fall, 1985, p 5).
Cr: Kingston Saltpeter Cave, Georgia


********** September 13, 1985
While working on a breakdown blockage of a long-closed passage in Kingston
Saltpeter Cave, Barton County, Georgia, Karl Sneed (13) suffered a smashed
finger. He was able to leave this easy cave under his own power. (Joel Sneed
Personal Communication undated).
C: Sullivan's Cave, Indiana
September 1985
A caver in a large novice group was apparently injured in some way and was
escorted from the cave. (Michiana Caver [N. Indiana Grotto] November 1985, 75).
Bc: Thunder River Cave, Arizona
September 1985
On Labor Day weekend a group of cavers was attempting to push upstream in
thunder River Cave in the Grand Canyon. As they exited, they were taking photos.
408 NSS News November 1986
At a turbulent narrow chute where two streams come together, a caver was asked to
pose straddling the whitewater. The caver slipped and immediately was sucked
under. She appeared five seconds later, five feet downstream and was pulled out. A
handline was rigged for the others. (Dave Bunnell The Explorer [So. Calif. Grotto]
October 1985, p 129).
AAr: Shelter Cave, Nebraska
September 1985
In September five youths were camping in a shelter cave (that was reportedly
man-made) near the Platte River south of Omaha. A slab of ceiling collapsed
crushing Michael Wiles (12), Mark Wiles (18) and David Funkhauser (17). The
collapse was attributed to seepage of groundwater, or the heat from a campfire the
boys had used. (Weekly World News October 1, 1985).
FDe: Tyson Spring Cave, Minnesota


********** September 15, 1985
While on a trip to dive the first and second sumps a crew was in the first sump
when a faulty bouyancy compensator (BC) inflated forcing a diver to the roof of the
passage. Debris had lodged in the mechanism. Almost simultaneously one of his
regulators began to free-flow (uncontrolled release of air). While getting the
regulator under control, the mouthpiece slipped out of his mouth and replacement
was difficult with the BC pushing into his face. (Steve Porter "Tyson Spring Cave
Project" Minnesota Speleology Monthly January 1986).
Drc: Cricket Cave, West Virginia


********** September 21, 1985
September 21 saw a trip into Cricket that completed the survey of a cave from
which "rescue would be virtually impossible." Thirteen cavers participated in
the last three trips - four falls were taken, several cavers had a very hard time with
the waterfall climb, one caver was pinned, three had ledges crumble under them in
canyon traverses, there was one carbide explosion, but only one minor injury
received medical attention Naturally. (Tom Spina "I remember Cricket" The
West Virginia Caver 3(6) December 1985, 3).
Cc: Leigh Cave, New Jersey
Fall 1985
A group of eight cavers entered Leigh Cave in New Jersey. Helen Fujii, the third
person to go in was unfamiliar with the cave and, unaware, got over the edge of a
pit just inside the entrance and slid to the bottom. She sustained bruises on one leg
and a cut on her cheek which required a stitch to close. (Ron Latigano "Report on
the Leigh Cave Accident" Met Grotto News Nov-Dec 1985, 35(6), p 23).
Br: Streamway Cave, California


********** October 8, 1985
A caver was attempting to descend through the breakdown floor of a canyon
passagea, when a slab six feet by three by three suddenly slid onto him as he sat on
another boulder. He managed to hold the slab with his legs while companions
passed him rocks to use to jam the large slab in place. He was then able to crawl
from beneath it. It had begun to compress his breathing when he stabilized it.
(Mark Fritzke Personal Communication October 8, 1985).
Dr: Rock Shelter Pit, Alabama
October 1985
A group of cavers descended Rock Shelter Pit on Lookout Mountain. Two
ascended and were off rope. Another was getting ready to go and talking to a
nearby companion when they heard rock sounds. The caver not on rope yelled rock
and took a step backward when an 18 by 18 inch rock struck his forward foot causing
a bad contusion to his large toe. An 18 by 30 inch rock hit next to the caver on rope,
severing the excess rope. They continued without further incident. (Tom Mook
"Incident at Rock Shleter Pit" unpublished report, October 31, 1985).
Dc: Newcastle Murder Hole, Virginia


********** October 13, 1985
On October 13, a group of five cavers entered Newcastle Murder Hole in Craig
County, Virginia. At the Elevator Pit they ascended via the Nasal Passage. Dan
Leghini, an experienced rock climber, went last. He did not appear and soon they
heard the sound of a fall. They called with no response. They descended to find that

---------- Page 12 ----------
he had taken a 25 foot fall down the smooth tube to a chockstone above more drop.
He had failed to answer because their question had been "Are you OK?", and he
wasn't sure. He was uninjured and continued. (Alex Sproul "Trip Reports" RASS
Register December 1985, p 3).
Dc: Acme Quarry Cave, West Virginia


********** October 20, 1985
A group of six cavers was in Acme Quarry Cave, Greenbrier County, West
Virginia on October 20. Three waited at a climbdown while the others continued. At
a descending, unmapped stream canyon, they proceeded to a 15 foot waterfall drop.
It was unmapped beyond and since one of the three didn't want to see (scoop) it
until he was prepared to map it, he and one other turned back, returning to the
climb-down. The third caver, now alone, found a bypass to the drop and continued
to where the canyon leveled out. He started back, saw a high lead and tried to climb
up to it. He fell eight feet but was not hurt and "limped" back to the group. The


********** mapper, while waiting had been heard to remark: "If we have to go after him, we'll
map as we go!"
On the way out, another of the group suffered cramps from dehydration. A
companion carried his camera box while he struggled out. (Bob Alderson Carbide
Dump [Blue Ridge Grotto] 20(11) November 1985, p 78).
Cc: Organ Cave, West Virginia


********** October 25, 1985
Five cavers entered the Lipp's Entrance to Organ Cave, Greenbrier County,
West Virginia at around p.m. on Saturday, October 25, their second trip that day.
Somewhere past the Maze, Danny Barber "lost his balance and fell approximately
20 feet," twisting a knee. They left the cave with no further incident. (Betty
McCauley, Trip Report in RASS Register December 1985, p 4).
Cr: Parks Ranch Cave, New Mexico


********** November 2, 1985
On November 2, five cavers entered Parks Ranch Cave, Eddy County, New
Mexico. This was to be an easy introductory trip for four of the group. At the
"overunders" section, the leader, Dave Belski (48) was climbing above the rest. He
reached up and "grabbed a large rock for a handhold.' It moved so he held on to
keep it from falling on those below. When it came loose it smashed his hand into the
wall hard enough to badly cut two fingers. He was escorted from the cave and
treated at a hospital emergency room - five or six stitches closed the cuts. (Dave
Belski "Parks Ranch Cave" trip report in Southwestern Cavers 11 December 1985.)

---------- Page 13 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Accident Report Form
Date of Accident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name (s) of person (s)
Age
Sex
Experience
involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving
Accidents" is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
(
) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
(
) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver, weather, equipment. clothing.
etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( ) Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose copies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
410 NSS News November 1986
Time:
State
Zip
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 14 ----------
Supplier of:
lelmets CMI
ubular sling Tekna
ibbs ascenders Chargers
Racks and brakebars Carabiners
Premier Carbide Lamps
Jumars
Knee pads
MI rope . BW rope Carbide Canvas Grip Tapes
Bruntons and Suuntos Electric lights T-shirts and much more
rite for price list to:
OB & BOB, PO Box 441, Lewisburg, WV 24901, U.S.A.
"Cavers Serving Cavers
Worldwide"
