
---------- Page 1 ----------
DECEMBER 1989-Part II
American
Caving
Accidents

---------- Page 2 ----------
American Caving Accidents
SINGLE ROPE TECHNIQUE:
AMERICAN, EUROPEAN, and in between
by Steve Knutson
First, let me say that no one can nor should tell another what system or
style of SRT he should use personal strengths, local caving
environments, equipment availability and other factors will dictate. One must
try different personal setups and rigging systems to discover what is best
suited. Rather let us look in a general, rambling way at the present SRT
scene, for it is now a bit confusing European techniques have found a
place in American caving.
I - Personal Rigs
By personal rig I mean the harness(es) and ascenders used by an
individual. There seem to be three main set-ups in use.
1) Mitchell. I define as a Mitchell, any rig using a chest harness with a
device for the main line to run through, intended to hold one upright and
close to the rope. Then, there are two or three ascenders or knots, one just
above the chest device (with the caver standing normally) and attached by
sling to one foot, a second ascender at just above knee level and attached
by sling to the other foot, and a third (optional) on a short sling to the seat
harness, and held in reserve. All ascenders should also be linked by sling to
the seat harness for safety, should part of the rig fail.
Thus rigged, the caver has one hand on the upper ascender, one on the
lower (or the sling to his seat harness) and ascends in a ladder climbing
motion, one foot stepping up after the other, the ascenders being pushed up
with each step. This works very well in free space. Against walls, especially
on sloped drops or the sloped portion of a drop, one switches to a "Texas,"
where the main line is released from the chest device, and the upper
ascender and/or the third ascender are used so that the caver sits in his seat
harness, supported by the upper or third ascender, while he pulls up the
lower ascender. He then steps up supported by the lower, while he slides
the upper one up, sitting back on seat support as soon as the upper
completes its motion, to conserve energy. Thus it is easy to ascend slopes.
Obviously, one can switch back and forth on complex drops. Jumar-type
ascenders are usually the ascender of choice.
2) Rope Walker. Here an ascender is attached to or just above a foot; a
second is at knee level and attached by sling to the other foot (and safetied
to the seat harness). A bungee cord can aid the performance of the knee
ascender (and sometimes is used on the foot ascender as well). A chest
harness and device to hold the main line is employed to hold the person
upright; this can take the form of a sling running diagonally across the chest,
over one shoulder and down the back, attached to the seat harness in front
and back and with an ascender attached at the shoulder. Thus the caver
ascends
DECEMBER 1989
VOLUME 47
NUMBER 12
Editor: Steve Knutson
Production: Mike & Lynne Sims
The NSS NEWS (ISSN-0027-7010) is published monthly by the National Speleological Society, Inc.,
Cave Ave., Huntsville, AL 35810. Second-class postage paid at Huntsville, AL and additional offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave
Ave, Huntsville, AL, 35810.
Copyright 1989 by the National Speleological Society, Inc.
Cover Photos @ by Ron Simmons
Grim Crawl of Death, Great-Ex Cave, Wyoming
Lost Worland River, Great-Ex Cave, Wyoming
314 NSS News December 1989
free space with an upright, walking motion. Slopes are done with the main
line out of the chest device or the shoulder ascender sling off the shoulder,
allowing one to stand upright on the slope. Gibbs ascenders are the device
of choice.
3) The Frog. This is a combination of Texas with the ascenders switched,
and the old Inchworm technique. In the Frog, with the caver in standing
position, one ascender is at belly-level and attached as closely as possible
to a low-set seat harness. The second ascender is just above the first and
attached by separate slings to both feet. One ascends, as in the fashion of
the old Inchworm, by doing a "squat" and standing back up. That is, you sit,
supported by the seat (lower) ascender, and slide the upper ascender up
then you stand up. A bungee cord in figure-8 around the shoulders is
attached to the seat ascender to pull it up as you stand. Then you sit down
and repeat the process. Since you have no real chest harness, the method
works without modification for free space or slopes.
Before we can evaluate these, we must realize that their strengths and
weaknesses will be relative to the rigging system used - European or
American.
II - RIGGING SYSTEMS
European.
Europeans have evolved a style of rigging quite different from the
American. The basic premise is that the main line should not touch rock as it
hangs, or at least that there be no bad contact, rope to rock, where the rope
would fray in ordinary use. Thus, a rope will be rigged initially so that it
hangs out away from the edge of the drop rather than passing over the edge
in an angle. Then, if a ledge is encountered, or a sloping descent becomes a
freehanging descent, the rope will be re-anchored so that it will not wear at
the ledge or breakover. Thus, a single pitch might be broken up into a
number of rope portions. In addition, a rope may be suspended in a desired
position by a "re-directional," where it is not actually anchored, but sits in a
carabiner attached by sling to an anchor, so that the rope is held away from
edges or waterfalls or whatever. Obviously, in ascending or descending,
each of these obstacles must be passed.
American.
The American style seems to have evolved relying on the toughness of
rope to handle wear and with long, free drops in mind. The rope is anchored
at the top and allowed to run over the edge and down, a single rope for the
full depth of the drop. If wear is expected or observed, a rope pad is
employed to protect the rope.
III - EVALUATIONS
A. Rigging
The European style will allow the use of smaller diameter ropes and rope
with inferior abrasion characteristics. It will also extend the life of any rope
and is good for project or expedition situations that will be long-term and
where occasional replacement of ropes would be impractical. Obviously,
Americans have used this style, on occasion, to hang a rope so that it
misses a waterfall or other obstacle.
This style also allows the ascent of a multi-anchored pitch by several
cavers at the same time. In some situations this would save time and keep
the party together. Rocks dislodged by a caver above would be an additional
hazard, however. In the low-probability case of a rope failure, of course, the
whole party might be jeopardized.
The American style saves greatly on the time spent rigging, equipment
used rigging, time spent each time the pitch is descended, and, in some
cases, time spent ascending. It is also inherently safer, since each reanchor
and re-directional that is passed in the European style, is a point where you
can err and be at risk. With American caving rope, at least, and in sizes
down to 9 mm, at least, there is quite obviously no need to reanchor a rope
just because it runs over a lip or hits a ledge. Quite often, such points show
no appreciable abrasion. With American caving rope there have been, to my

---------- Page 3 ----------
knowledge, no rope failures. Dangerous spots are signaled by obvious wear
and fraying, and the situation is corrected.
One seems forced to the conclusion that the utility for the European style is
the following:
1) Project or expeditionary caving where rope replacement is impractical
2) Where you can't get good quality caving rope
3) Where you want to go to very small rope sizes - say 5 - 7 mm
B. Personal Rigs:
The Ropewalker is easily the fastest and most efficient style, followed by
the Mitchell and, way behind, the Frog, for ascent of a free drop. In a
European-style rigged pitch, the Frog becomes quite handy, but obviously
wastes energy between reanchor points. Passing a reanchor is easy for the
Frog, with both ascenders above the waist, but it is almost as easy with the
Mitchell. Obviously, a chest box like the Simmons double-roller or Fritzke
Alpine box is best, in that one can get the main line out while leaving the
upper ascender in. The Ropewalker is not recommended for anything but
free ascents since the foot ascender is hard to get at for passing reanchors.
The Frog is very good for hauling loads, since both legs are used in the
move that hoists the load. It also seems to be the lightest and most compact
rig. Europeans claim that they have many pits that are very narrow and that
the Frog is good for this, but I can't see why it would be better than anything
else, unless the pit is no narrow that a chest box would get in your way.
My personal conclusions are these: With American caving rope of 9 mm
and up, a re-anchoring of the rope is seldom necessary. A Mitchell is quite
usable in European rigging and superior to the Frog on any free pitch or
portion, but you must be able to convert to a Frog to have equality in hauling
loads. A Ropewalker is not advisable in many technical situations. A Frog
must be convertible to a Ropewalker to gain parity with the Mitchell. A Frog
is not advisable on American-rigged pitches since it is impossible for it to
pass some breakovers.


********** In general, remember this: Whatever your personal preference, if you get
around much at all, you had better be ready to deal with European rigging.
There is an obvious utility for it and it is now part of the American scene.
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS - 1988
This is another compendium of safety incidents in American caving. Some
have asked why it has the title 'American Caving Accidents' - why indeed?:
That was the name of it when I got editorship and no one told me I could
change it. So I have chosen to interpret 'American' as meaning 'the
Americas' and I feel free to include anything from north, central and south
America.
As some now-forgotten statistician pointed out, 'accidents' has to mean
'incidents' and I choose to accept any potentially educational safety incident
(that is, it doesn't have to result in injury or aid for the victim). I should
emphasize that this volume is not intended just for the dry documentation of
incidents; its real value, in my opinion, is its ability to educate. If you read
ACA, your safety consciousness will be affected.
It is apparent that some readers don't know how to properly evaluate the
reports in ACA. The key is to look at the reference. If the only reference is a
newspaper article, the facts may be in error. If the references include reports
from cavers, the reliability increases. Actual rescue logs are probably the
most reputable. In any case, the important things are to put yourself in these
situations and imagine how you and your gear would handle them, and to
realize that these accidents do happen.
1. RESULT OF INCIDENT
CODE - RESULT
AA - Fatality (body evacuation
A - Injury reguiring evacuation or aid
B - No injury - required evacuation or aid
C - Injury - no evacuation or aid required
D - No injury - no evacuation or aid
Total
Total AA, A, B, C
2. CAUSE OF INCIDENT
CODE - CAUSE
a - acetylene or gas explosion
b bad air
C caver fall
d drowning
e - equipment failure or lack
f flood
h hypothermia
i illness
I losing the way
r rockfall
S stuck caver
X exhaustion
o other
3. SCUBA
1988 Incident Summary
The total number of reported incidents in 1988 was 61, just a bit down from
the 64 and 63 of the previous two years. Still, the total of AA, A, B and C
incidents with consequence, was 48, a bit above the 45 and 47 of '86 and
'87. This is good news - the number of incidents seems to have leveled off
and we are not seeing an increase, even though the total number of cavers
is probably increasing.
The number of fatal incidents was 4, with three of these (Mar 26, Jul 11,
Sep 24B) involving falls. One (Mar 26) was apparently crawling too fast(!)
and couldn't stop when a drop was encountered; the second (Jul 11) was
free climbing unbelayed around a 20' pit and fell; the third tried to
down-climb a deep pit, without a belay and wearing tennis shoes. The fourth
was an equipment failure (Jun 4) when a climbing pole collapsed.
In CAVE DIVING there were the usual fatalities, but for the first time these
involved NSS cave-certified divers. I don't think this means anything more
than that this is, indeed, an extremely dangerous activity and even highly
trained divers are not immune.
In '88, the categories of equipment failure and caver fall were dominant,
with a marked decrease in rockfall incidents from the previous two years. Let
us summarize the categories in order of prevalence.
There were 19 EQUIPMENT FAILURES. This included 5 cases of weak or
failed lights (Jan 14, Jan 29, Apr 5, Dec 18A,B) 3 harness failures - broken
foot loop (Apr 23), chest sling failure with inversion (Aug 8), chest harness
buckle failure (Aug 19), and 3 incidents of fouled rappels - two chin straps
caught in figure-8's (Mar A,B) and a shirt caught in a rack (Jul 10).
In addition there was a rack whose retaining nut came off (with the bars on
the nut side) but fortunately with no consequences, though the bars fell off
when slack was released at the bottom (May). A carabiner attaching a rack
to the seat harness broke while on rappel (Mar C) but the caver was able to
grab the rope above the rack and hang on. A scaling pole collapsed causing
a fatality (Jun 4), a caver was trapped when trying to climb a cable ladder
and inverted with a foot caught in a rung (Jun 12), and a stove malfunctioned
causing severe burns (Jan B). Note that we never seem to have any rope
failures but that harness and other gear does fail.
The other major event was CAVER FALLS, of which there were 20. Most
were short (Jan A, Feb 7, Mar 6,11,28, Spring, Apr 2, Sep 3, 10, 26, and
Dec 10) with injuries ranging from very minor to injured knees and dislocated
shoulders (Sep 10, Dec 10). There were six falls of from 20 to 75 feet
including three fatalities (Mar 26, Summer C, Jul 11, Sep 24B). In addition
there was one out-of-control rappel (Nov 26) with too few bars on the rope
resulting in burned hands. A broken leg resulted from a downclimb with a
poorly tied handline (Dec 10) and mild injuries were suffered in a fall taken
while looking for a place to go to the bathroom.
Note that none of these falls was the result of a failed belay.
The "OTHER" category came next with 8 incidents. There were two snake
encounters (Jan 4, Summer E) and such other bizarre happenings as rough
seas in a sea cave (Oct 14) , an eye gouged by wire in an entrance dig

---------- Page 4 ----------
(Jul 23), a sling handline removed by others during a trip (Summer D), a
water pump in a cave pool shorting out, causing shocks to cavers in the pool
(Summer A), a knee dislocated while crawling (June 18), and a chaotic cave
baby-sitting trip (June A).
ROCK FALL (7) fell from its previous high position but still included two
cases of cavers nearly or temporarily trapped by large shifting rocks (Jan 17,
Summer G), two near misses (Jan 3, Sep 24A), minor injury from rockfall
down a talus slope (Summer F), a caver hit on the helmet by a rock (Sep
24C), and a bad leg bruise from a rock while ascending (Feb 27).
There were three incidents of being LOST (stranded) (Mar 5, Jun 16)
including one involving a pull-down through-trip (Summer B).
EXHAUSTION took a minor toll with one caver having to be evacuated
(Sep 13) and one climbing a rope, having trouble with ascenders and
becoming inverted (May 2).
Three categories had only one incident - a near miss FLOOD (Jul 17),
BAD AIR (Jun B) and a gas EXPLOSION (Oct 8), though the last two were
closely related and deserve special consideration in our increasingly
polluted environment.
I would like to thank all those who contributed reports and information, and
especially Ray Hardcastle for setting aside incident material from his NSS
News column work. It helps considerably if grotto newsletter editors would
send issues containing safety incidents to me. Thanks to those who already
do. This publication belongs to the cavers of the Americas - it is only as
good as the material you send in:
Send info to:
Steve Knutson
ACA Editor
Summer/Fall P.O. Box 1207
Mt. Shasta, CA 96067
Winter/Spring P.O. Box 572
Boring, OR 97009
If anyone has any good action caving or rescue slides, I need such for the
ACA covers. Send good dupes by the end of September for consideration.
For action photographers, this may be your only chance to see your work on
the cover of the NSS News! I also appreciate, and try to make appropriate
changes, regarding thoughtful criticism. Nothing in the NSS is perfect and if
we don't think critically, things will never get better. I feel that someone who
believes criticism is nothing but 'negative thinking' is someone with no
thoughts to offer, or some vested interest in the status quo.
Criticism of the facts presented in these reports, however, is basically futile
- if you have knowledge of an incident and fail to report, you have no right
to complain when the report doesn't include your facts.
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED
CODE-CAVE NAME
STATE
DATE
Ca-Miller's Cove Cave
Virginia
9-76
Bf-Fisher Cave
Tennessee
2-24-87
Ac-Sotano de San Agustin
Oaxaca, Mexico
3-31-87
Ble-Alabaster Caverns
Oklahoma
7-30-87
De-Starlight Cave
Alaska
9-2-87
Ce-El Capitan Cave
Alaska
9-87
1988 INCIDENTS
CODE-CAVE NAME
Cc-Puente Natural
Oaxaca, Mexico
January A
Ae-Sistema Huautla
Oaxaca, Mexico
January B
Dr-Sotano de los Planos
Puebla, Mexico
1-3
Bo-Cueva de la Venta
Mexico
1-4
Be-Maple Run Cave
Texas
1-14
Br-Thunderdome Cave
Tennessee
1-17
Be-State Trooper Cave
Kentucky
1-29
316 NSS News December 1989
Cc-New River Cave
Virginia
2-7
Cr-Nita Ka
Oaxaca, Mexico
2-27
Ac-Scott Hollow Cave
West Virginia
3-6
Ac-Buckner's (Trap Door) Cave
Indiana
3-11
BI-Porter's Cave
Virginia
3-5
AAc-Cave in Diablo Canyon
New Mexico
3-26
Be-Cueva Cheve
Oaxaca, Mexico
March A
Ce-Cueva Cheve
Oaxaca, Mexico
March B
De-Cueva Cheve
Oaxaca, Mexico
March C
Cc-Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
3-28
Ac-Neff's Canyon Cave
Utah
Spring
Ac-Onyx Cave
Arizona
4-2
Be-Ape Cave
Washington
4-5
Ci-Crystal Cave
Utah
April
De-Valhalla Pit
Alabama
4-23
Cex-Rattling Cave
Tennessee
5-2
De-China Pig Hole
Missouri
May
AAe-Cottonwood Cave
New Mexico
6-4
Bo-Reed's Cave
South Dakota
June A
Db-Hick's Cave
Kentucky
June B
Bce-Rubidoux (Indian) Cave
Missouri
6-11
Be-Scott Hollow Cave
West Virginia
6-12
BI-Cave in Cash Canyon
Tennessee
6-16
Co-Lost Creek Cave
Tennessee
6-18
Bo-Whigpistle Cave
Kentucky
Summer A
BI-Fossil Mountain Ice Cave
Wyoming
Summer B
Ac-Daniels Cave
Alabama
Summer C
Do-Cass Cave
West Virginia
Summer D
Do-Lady's Descent Cave
Texas
Summer E
Cr-Crystal 67 Cave
California
Summer F
Cr-Unspecified Cave
Arizona
Summer G
De-Grapevine Pit
West Virginia
7-10
AAc-Levi Cave
Tennessee
7-11
Bf-Carcass Cave
New Mexico
7-17
Co-Cave on Steven's Farm
West Virginia
7-23
Be-Lechuguilla Cave
New Mexico
8-8
Be-Hell Below Cave
New Mexico
8-19
Ac-Fort Stanton Cave
New Mexico
9-3
Ac-Ain't Barbwire Cave
Arizona
9-10
Bx-McFail's Cave
New York
9-13
Dr-Crystal 67 Cave
California
9-24 A
AAc-Pig Hole
West Virginia
9-24 B
Dr-Widow Cave
Oklahoma
9-24 C
Bc-Counterfeiter's Cave
Missouri
9-26
Cc-Gage Caverns
New York
10-8
Ca-Hick's Cave
Kentucky
10-8
Do-Deathtrap Cave
California
10-14
Df-Keystone River Cave
Tennessee
11-19
Ace-Hoya de Guaguas
Mexico
11-26
Ace-Indian Grave Point Cave
Tennessee
12-10
Ac-Middle Millerton Lake Cave
California
12-10
Cc-Fisher Ridge System
Kentucky
12-11
Be-Salt Peter Cave
Missouri
12-18 A
Be-Salt Peter Cave
Missouri
12-18 B
DIVING INCIDENTS
AA-Orange Grove Sink
Florida
2-7
AA-Little Dismal Sink
Florida
5-15
D-Orange Grove Sink
Florida
5-28
AA-Blue Springs
Florida
6-11
AA-Arch Spring Cave
Pennsylvania
6-18
AA-Chacalal Cave
Mexico
6-19
AA-Little River Springs
Florida
7-3
AA-Orange Grove Sink
Quebec, Canada
7-19
AA-Ottawa River System
Florida
9-5
AA-Emerald Sink
Florida
12-15

---------- Page 5 ----------
PREVIOUSLY UNREPORTED INCIDENTS
Ca-acetylene explosion
September 1976
Miller's Cave, Virginia
Al Stewart reached the register in Miller's Cave, Roanoke County, Virginia
via the climb-down from the balcony of the Ante-Room. The register was a
large plastic tube with a screw-on cap. When Stewart opened the register, it
exploded in his face. On a prior trip, a caver had found the register book
damp and had applied fresh carbide to dry it out. Stewart was wearing
glasses and had only his beard singed and the end of his nose blistered. (Al
Stewart "A new cave hazard" in Michiana Caver Oct. 1976).
Bf-flood-trapped


********** February 24, 1987
Fisher Cave, Tennessee
Around noon on Saturday, February 21, four cavers entered Fisher Cave
in Cannon County, Tennessee. These were Phil Frates (36), Roger Fleming
(36), and Fabienne Staussen (29), from Nashville and Dave Metzger (33)
from Philadelphia. The entrance, some three feet by four feet wide, was dry
when they entered, but a steady rain began and sumped the entrance and
the small passage leading to larger, higher chambers beyond. When the
group tried to exit, they discovered their predicament and went to a dry
chamber about 400 feet in, to wait for the floor to recede.
When they didn't get home by 7 p.m., friends and relatives called the
Sheriff's Office. Their car was found on a road near the cave so a callout of
emergency services was initiated. Crews arrived by 9 p.m. Sunday, but
could do little.
About 24 hours later, Steve Hudson, an expert cave diver from Huntsville,
used scuba gear to dive through the flooded entrance and bring food and
clothing in a waterproof container to the four. The group was found to be
mildly hypothermic in the 55-60 degree cave, so the food and clothing was
well-received.
Tuesday evening the water level had fallen so the group decided to try to
go out. At about 10 p.m. emergency workers at the entrance heard their calls
and with help from rescuers, the four were out by midnight.
References:
1) Renee Elder and Phil Williams "Nashville Spelunkers Rescued"
Nashville Tennessean, Feb 24, 1987.
2) Alan Bostich "Stories, game passed trapped cavers' time" lbid., Feb 25,
1987.
Ac-caver fall


********** March 31, 1987
Sotano de San Agustin, Oaxaca, Mexico
On Tuesday, March 31, an American expedition was packing out of
Sotano de San Agustin near Huautla, Oaxaca, Mexico. The team had
camped at -650 m to do a sump dive that connected San Agustin to Nita
Nanta making the combined cave the third deepest in the world.
Dan Broussard (39) and Bill Steele were the last to leave camp. Several
hours later, they had reached Camp II at -600 m. Broussard described his
feeling then as "worn out." The exit from the cave was being done in more
than one trip, so he lightened his pack of several pounds of photo gear,
clothing and first aid supplies.
They proceeded up the Fishure with the usual spraying waterfalls on most
pitches. It seemed to go well and Broussard, in the lead, was able to move to
each rope in turn and continue up after yelling off rope" to Steele, below.
Broussard reached the top of the Fishure, a shelf above the first waterfall.
From the shelf one descends 7 feet to a ledge leading directly to the old
Camp I. A short rope with a loop is rigged at the 7-foot pitch to provide a foot
hold part way down. Broussard untethered his pack and lowered it to the
ledge. He then lowered himself over the edge and placed his foot in the
loop; with his weight on the rope, he could no longer get his fingers around it
for a handhold. As he began to lose his balance, he apparently lost
consciousness and doesn't remember the fall. He did fall, and since his only
support was his foot in the loop, he went over backward, his back and head
finally hitting the edge of the ledge. His foot then came out of the loop and
he fell another 6 feet into the stream above the waterfall.
Broussard regained consciousness, pushing his face out of the water. The
pain in his back was so severe he thought it had been broken. After several
minutes, he crawled and climbed up to the dry shelf of old Camp I.
Steele arrived and they decided it would be best to continue out. They
were at -200 meters. Broussard ate several candy bars and packed a
minimum of gear. Six hours later, he reached the Sala Grande entrance
chamber. There was still two long rope pitches to do but Broussard was
exhausted. He crawled over to the Sand Room and collapsed.
Steele covered the victim with a space blanket and put a belt-generator
carbide lamp under it to provide heat. Steele continued out and reached the
surface camp house at 2 a.m. Everyone was tired from their trip out, so he
returned to Broussard alone, armed with two sleeping bags. Broussard is a
diabetic, but had forgot his evening injection of insulin.
The following day two rescuers arrived, but Broussard was able to make it
up the last two pitches under his own power in about two hours.
Reference: Don Broussard Personal Communication Aug 29, 1989, 5 pgs.
Analysis: X-rays later showed that there had been no broken bones. The
pain was due to pulled or strained back muscles. Broussard attributes his fall
to carelessness when tired, but an insulin imbalance/low blood sugar may
have contributed.
In my own caving, I dislike loops for footholds, and ladders or etriers rigged
or used for descent. I think a short rappel is much more controllable. In a 7
foot descent, an arm rappel would have sufficed. Broussard suggests that
another loop above the foot loop could have provided a handhold, or he
could have used a Jumar.
Broussard's Bell motorcycle helmet was dented and fractured in a 1.5 inch
by 2.5 inch area. The chin strap had a chin cup to help keep it in place. He
feels that Steele's space blanket and carbide lamp kept him from the
clutches of hypothermia.
The real lesson here is that when one is tired, even the simple things
become difficult - cavers and their companions should keep this in mind.
equipment failure


********** July 30, 1987
Alabaster Caverns, Oklahoma
On Thursday, Tommy (13) and Travis (10) Meritt were with their parents at
Alabaster Caverns State Park in Oklahoma. Shortly after noon they told their
mother they were going to play at a natural bridge. Later they encountered a
cave entrance. Inside they found a string and, with help from their flashlight,
followed it. About 100 feet in, apparently out of sight of the entrance, their
flashlight failed; when they tried to follow the string, it broke. At first they
were very frightened but started singing songs and calmed down.
Meanwhile they had been missed and the mother had called the Sheriff.
Some men were sent out and searched the main caves to no avail.
The lost boys tried moving around but fell in some water and started
getting cold. They managed to climb up a bit higher to where it was not wet
and there they waited.
More searchers were organized including cavers from the Central
Oklahoma Grotto. They boys were found, cold and afraid, a little before
midnight.
Reference: AP untitled, The Dallas Morning News, August 1, 1987 (in
Texas Caver June 1988, p. 69).
De-equipment failure


********** September 2, 1987
Starlight Cave, Alaska
In August the Allred family was exploring a new cave on Prince of Wales
Island off the coast of Alaska. The cave was Starlight Cave and had an
entrance pit 100 feet deep. Kevin and Carlene took turns solo caving and

---------- Page 6 ----------
mapping the 2,200 foot cave.
When Carlene's turn came, she completed the mapping chores but had
some difficulty exiting the pit. She was very experienced but had been away
from vertical caving for seven years. She used a 3-Gibbs rope walker, but
free-climbed the first 50 feet, up a slope with logs and brush on it. Above this
there was still brush to contend with and it kept dislodging the ascender loop
from her right foot.
A knot had to be passed at the 75 foot level and she found that one of the
keeper cords of one Gibbs had broken during the slope climb. The part it
attached fell away when she removed the ascender from the rope to pass
the knot. This landed on a ledge not far below and she was able to retrieve
it.
Her chest ascender came off entirely and by itself because the carabiner
was not locking.
Reference: Carlene Allred "Starlight Cave and El Capitan Cave Trip
Report" The Alaskan Caver Vol 8, No. 6 April 1988 p. 3.
Ce-equipment failure
September 1987
El Capitan Cave, Alaska
In August two cavers were visiting El Capitan Cave, a known cave, on
Prince of Wales Island at the north end of El Capitan Passage, in Alaska.
They took turns visiting the cave and babysitting their three young children.
Carlene Allred was in the cave on her turn and surveyed down a side
passage to the large, branched main passage. The cave was phreatic and
maze-like. At the end she found a small muddy room with a crawl
continuation half-filled with water. She could feel a draft, so she struggled
through the barely passable crawl.
It indeed opened up on the other side of the pool, but her carbide lamp
started getting dim, even though it had been recharged not long before at
the main passage where she had left most of her gear and spare carbide.
There were scuff marks on the floor so she expected to find an easier way
back to the main passage and proceeded. She wandered about following
those marks with ever-diminishing light and finally got lost. At one point she
slipped down a muddy wall, "peeling back" a fingernail in the process and
had her carbide light go out. She got out her penlight, but this worked in a
flickering fashion at best so she activated her cylume stick - her last
source of light. Soon she stumbled across the the survey tape she'd left at
the original pool crawl. She proceeded back to her pack and exited.
Reference: Carlene Allred "Starlight Cave and El Capitan Cave Trip
Report" The Alaskan Caver Vol 8, No 6 April 1988, p. 5.
1988 INCIDENT REPORTS
Cc-caver fall
January
Puente Natural, Oaxaco, Mexico
As part of an expedition, a cave called Puente Natural was being explored
for a possible connection to nearby Cueva Cheve. One day five cavers went
on a push trip. Just beyond the 100 meter entrance pit, Carol Vesely and
Nancy Pistole came to a 5 meter climb-down. This had not been rigged by
cavers ahead of them, but they found it difficult enough to need a rope so
they rigged one. Later the group ran out of rope and one returned to this
drop to bump the rope ahead. This was to be the last push trip so they
expected the rope to be replaced by the better climbers of the group on the
way out.
This did not happen. On the way out, two exited with the rope and Pistole,
in the following group of three, had to free climb the pitch. Part way up a
knee dislocated and she fell ten feet into three feet of water. The knee
relocated naturally and she was able to get out without further incident.
(Carol Vesely Personal Communication, March 1989).
318 NSS News December 1989
Ae-stove equipment failure
January 1988
Sistema Huautla, Oaxaca, Mexico
In late January a sizable crew entered Sotano San Agustin of the Sistema
Huautla in Oaxaca, Mexico. They proceeded to the Sala Grande de la Sierra
Mazateca for a nine-day camp. This effort was mainly in support of the
Huautla Project cave movie.
Bill Steele pumped up a MSR Whisperlite stove to start dinner only to have
it explode in a ball of flaming fuel and vapor. Bill was wrapped in flames
amid much shouting and thrashing, his companions rushed to his aid,
extinguishing the flames. Steele had suffered painful burns on his back and
right hand - the skin "hanging in tatters from his palm."
They applied what first aid they could, including Tylenol III for pain.
Accompanied by two cavers, Steele started out.
At the Gorge, just above camp, they found that rain had swelled the
stream. At formerly easy swims, they had to cling to the walls to make their
way against the current. Halfway up they encountered two late-coming
expedition members who fortunately had rerigged some drops to avoid the
heavy water flow. Steele and his companions made it to the surface in 11
hours.
References:
1) Jay Arnold "Sistema Huautla, The Movie" D.C. Speleograph, April
1988, p. 3-4.
2) Bill Steele Personal Communication June 1988.
Analysis: The stove was one using gas and was filled with Mexican
unleaded. This stuff (Coleman fuel, white gas, etc.) is very volatile and
flammable. This is not a unique occurrence. Even kerosene can be
dangerous - a kerosene stove, over pumped and suddenly released, can
put out a great rush of flammable vapor.
Steele suffered second and third-degree burns but no permanent damage.
The pain was intense - he occasionally screamed in pain on the way out
and it is remarkable that he was able to exit under his own power, up rope
drops of 77, 35, 8, 60, 15, 110, and 150 meters plus 17 short rope climbs
and a couple of "arduous" face climbs in the Fool's Day Extension. And
these riggings were often complex with rebelays, knots, rope pads, and
bolts.
Dr-rockfall


********** January 3, 1988
Sotano de los Planos, Puebla, Mexico
On Sunday, January 3, Louise Hose (35) and Marc Tremblay made a first
descent of the Sotano de los Planos, a 220 meter deep surface pit. The
upper part of the pit was found to be in a thrust fault with friable walls. They
used 9mm rope and put in 13 rebelays on the sloping pit wall. At the bottom
was a second drop for which they had no rope. They began to ascend,
sketching and measuring the first pit.
Their method was for Tremblay to ascend a rebelay, drop the tape to Hose
and the segment would be measured. They would then continue, climbing in
tandem with a rebelay in between. After a 72 meter segment, Tremblay
passed the rebelay just above him and continued up. Noticing a small, loose
rock, he swung to the side to dispose of it - as he did so he grabbed the
wall, pulling loose a 1.5 meter rock which went crashing down the pit.
He yelled "rock" and Hose, at the next lower rebelay, pulled herself as close
to the wall as possible. The rock went by one or two meters to one side.
Fearing rope damage, she continued the climb in a delicate manner. They
exited without further incident.
Reference: Louise Hose NSS Incident Report undated, 2 pp.
Analysis: When using rebelays, speed in ascent is achieved if cavers
ascend in tandem, one rebelay apart. It obviously also increases the rockfall
hazard.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Bo-snake entrapment
Jan 4,1989
Cueva de la Venta, Mexico
On January 4, three cavers, Cynthia Vann, Ray Hardcastle, and John Pint
were scouting for caves and decided to visit La Venta cave, a lava tube with
75 "neatly spaced" entrances, near Tequila volcano. Because it was only a
scouting trip, they had only a 6-volt flashlight and a small disposable
flashlight, virtually spent. In the longest section of the tube the way was
conveniently lit by the many entrances. They came to an unlit section, a
canyon only a foot wide at floor level and widening to five feet at shoulder
height. They proceeded but the lead person's single light failed to reveal a
large dormant snake which the second person stepped on and the third,
Hardcastle, had to leap to avoid.
The first two ended up on the downcave side of the enraged, six-foot-long
snake which was hissing and striking with an obvious reach of two feet. They
soon found the walls too slippery to chimney across, so Hardcastle left the
cave and fetched a pole. With this he was able to hold the snake down while
the other two scrambled past. Then Hardcastle released the writhing serpent
and they all ran for it.
Reference: John Pint "Trapped in La Venta Cave" Subterranea No. 1,
March 1988 p 4 (Espeleoclub Zotz, Cd. Granja, Jalisco, Mexico).
Be-equipment failure


********** January 14, 1989
Maple Run Cave, Texas
On Thursday, January 14, Bobby Kline (11), Shawn Richardson (11),
Aaron Clemons (10), Brandon Davis (10) and Matt Burdon (10) decided to
go caving "to collect stalactites." They all lived in the Maple Run subdivision
of Austin, Texas. On skateboards, a bicycle and a scooter, they headed for
nearby Maple Run Cave. At 5 p.m., equipped with a single flashlight, they
entered. Another boy waited outside, watching the vehicles, giving the others
an hour and a half to explore before he went for help. Thirty minutes later,
they reached a room about 100 feet from the entrance. The room, about 30
feet long by 15 feet wide and six feet high, was entered through a small hole.
They were now lost, the weak flashlight unable to reveal the way out. They
huddled together in the cold and prayed.
The boy at the entrance eventually went for help and at 8 p.m. parents
called the Travis County Sheriff's Office. Fire Department and emergency
services crews responded as did cavers from Austin. Cavers found the boys
and brought then to the surface at around 9:10 p.m.
References:
1) John Harris and Berta Delgado "In deep trouble - boys saved from
cave adventure" Austin American-Statesman Jan 15, 1988 p 1, 11.
2) Ed. "Five Boys Rescued from Cave" from School Weekly, in
Subterranean Sun, Nov 1988, p 6.
Br-rockfall


********** January 17, 1989
Thunderdome Cave, Tennessee
On January 17, five cavers went to Thunderdome Cave in Tennessee
(FE281) to survey the Libby's Hellhole section. They were in two teams, one
to survey and one to rig drops. They entered at noon with Mike Doughty and
Mike Rogers rigging while Jim Richards, Jack Thomison and Mike Russell
surveyed.
The second drop rigged, of 24-foot depth, is in a canyon about five feet
wide, narrowing to two and a half feet at the lip where several large, loose
boulders were wedged. It was possible to remove all but two of these and
the rope was rigged so that it did not rest on the two boulders.
The survey was completed and the cavers headed for the entrance.
Doughty and Russell climbed the two drops successfully; Thomison and
Rogers climbed the second (24-ft) and Rogers waited there for Richards
while Thomison proceeded out.
When Richards got to the lip, the notch where the rope rested gave way,
releasing a 75 to 100 pound rock which came to rest on Richards' right leg,
painfully pinning him to the wall. He called to Rogers who was some
distance away, coiling a rope. Rogers came over, safetied to the rope with a
Jumar and helped Richards lift the rock so that he could free his leg. They
proceeded out without further incident.
Reference: Anon. 'Thunderdome Cave Accident Report' undated, 2 pp.
Be-lost, equipment lack


********** January 29, 1988
State Trooper Cave, Kentucky
On the evening of January 29, two male teenagers from Bowling Green,
Kentucky decided to explore State Trooper Cave, located in that town.
Dressed in street clothes and without helmets, they entered the stream cave
and waded into it for some distance. Finally they turned back and were only
250 feet from the entrance when both of their light sources failed - both
candles went out. They felt their way to a rock near a rimstone dam and
waited for help.
The following day, four local cavers entered the cave and at about noon,
encountered the lost pair and led them out. They had suffered only mild
hypothermia but obviously couldn't have lasted much longer. Apparently
they had told no one they were going caving.
References:
1) David Bauer "Spelunkers guide lost teens from Trooper Cave" The
Daily News (Bowling Green, KY) Feb 8, 1988, p. 3.
2) Philip Reeder "The State Trooper Cave Rescue - The Untold Story"
Adventures of the Green River Grotto No. 15, June 1988, p 15.
Cc-caver fall


********** February 7, 1988
New River Cave, Virginia
On February 7, cavers going to New River Cave in Virginia encountered a
caver who had "taken a fall near the entrance" and had a head injury but
proceeded out without real assistance. (Dave Bolter "New River Cave,
Tawyny's Register May 1988, p 8.
Cr-rock fall


********** Febraury 27, 1988
Nita Ka, Oaxaca, Mexico
While exiting Nita Ka from their deepest point of penetration, -525 m,
Mason Estes was ascending a rope when a rock fell, striking him on one
knee, resulting in a bad bruise. There was swelling and severe pain, so they
terminated the survey and exited the cave. (J. Smith, Personal Communi-
cation March, 1989).
Ac-caver fall


********** March 6, 1989
Scott Hollow Cave, West Virginia
On Sunday, March 6, three cavers, Bob Addis, Randy Ferrell and Steve
Mosberg were exiting Scott Hollow Cave in West Virginia. They had spent
some 15 hours exploring and surveying. The entrance pitch is a 10 to 12 foot
chimney leading to the bottom of a ladder leading to the surface. The group
had apparently got spread out and two reached the surface. The third,
Stephen Mosberg (34) reached the top of the chimney but as he reached for
the bottom rung of the ladder his foot slipped from the opposite wall and he
fell to the bottom of the crevice.
Mosberg suffered a fractured left ankle. He soon determined that it would
not support his weight. He also had minor abrasions on his forearms. He
called for help but his companions were not within hearing. After three or
four minutes, Ferrell returned and soon a rope was rigged to assist Mosberg
up the drop.

---------- Page 8 ----------
References:
1) Randy Ferrell "Trip Report: Scott Hollow 3/5/88" Parkersburg
Subterranea Flyer Vol. 4, No. 4, p 9-11.
2) Stephen Mosberg "NSS Accident Report" 2 pp, undated.
Analysis: Mosberg attributes the accident to carelessness on an easy climb
due to fatigue and being overanxious to reach the surface. It is easy to
understand why his companions were not immediately available for help, but
such separation of a party is not to be commended. If Mosberg's injuries had
been worse, quick aid might have been crucial.
Bl-lost cavers


********** March 5, 1988
Porter's Cave, Virginia
Several Boy Scouts were exploring in Porter's Cave, Alleghany County,
Virginia and apparently became confused and unable to find their way out.
The local volunteer rescue squad was summoned when the group failed to
exit on schedule, but the lost cavers were found and led out before the
rescue squad arrived. (Ted Andrus "Porter's Cave - Video Trip" RASS
Register May 1988).
Ac-caver fall


********** March 11, 1988
Buckman's (Trap Door) Cave, Indiana
On Friday, March 11, at about 1 p.m. five students and an instructor from
Western Michigan University entered Trap Door Cave, near Bloomington,
Indiana. The trip was part of a course called "Risk Taking for a Change."
In this course exercise, a person would be given a candle and a general
overview of the layout of the cave, including the location of a flashlight, and
sent in; the instructor would be in the cave observing.
David Paul (20) entered and was stoop-walking and/or crawling along a
wide, muddy ledge next to a twelve foot drop when he lost his footing and
fell to the bottom. His left arm was broken so the instructor went for help.
The authorities were notified and a local volunteer fire department member
arrived followed by the Bloomington Hospital ambulance service special
rescue team. The rescuers were told that the accident site was too small for
any additional people so they rigged a haul line at the entrance climb. The
instructor, presumably with help from his students, tied a rope around the
chest of the victim and dragged him to the entrance climb where he was
hauled out and then transported to Bloomington Hospital by the rescue
squad. He was treated for a fractured left humerous.
References:
1) Will Ott "Accident Report" undated, 3 pp.
2) Ed. "Caver Hurt" The Herald-Telephone Mar 12, 1988.
3) J. Hamblin, Bloomington Hospital Ambulance Service Run Sheet,
018921, Run 4508, undated.
Analysis: The accident site was actually spacious and it is not known why
the rescue team which had reportedly been NCRC trained and had NCRC
members in service was not brought to the accident site. Ott speculates that
there was panic on the part of the instructor.
This is not ordinary cave exploration and such "experience" games could
surely by played just as effectively and much more safely without involving
the fragile and non-renewable cave resource.
AAc-caver fall


********** March 26, 1988
Cave In Diablo Canyon, New Mexico
On March 26, a large group of hikers were traversing Diablo Canyon,
fifteen miles northwest of Santa Fe. At 6:30 p.m. some did a 20 minute rock
climb to reach a cave entrance on the canyon wall. At the entrance several
320 NSS News December 1989
headed in. Adam Blum (22) led the way and was apparently going very fast
through a crawl when he came to a drop-off and couldn't stop. He fell about
75 feet, suffering severe head injuries.
His companions soon reached him; some began cardiopulmonary
resuscitation while others went for help. An hour later, Blum was
pronounced dead by paramedics. Rescuers from various departments
removed the body late Saturday night.
Reference: Victoria Alba "Santa Fe man dies in rock-climbing accident" The
New Mexican March 27, 1988.
Be-equipment failure
March, A
Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
As part of an expedition to pursue the exploration of this very deep cave, a
group headed in on a photo and survey trip. On the second drop (30 feet)
about 1,000 feet into the cave, Carol Vesely was rappelling and about ten
feet down when the chin strap from her Joe Brown helmet got caught in her
figure-8 descender. She had one spare ascender attached to her seat
harness and this was clipped in and the strap released. At that point she was
unable to release the Jumar and unable to get her other ascenders out of
her pack. A companion lowered her an additional Jumar and sling and she
was able to continue.
References:
1) Carol Vesely, Personal Communication Mar 1989.
2) Peter Bosted "Mexico" SFBC Newsletter May 1988, p 6.
Ce-equipment failure
March, B
Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
On the trip mentioned above, the group continued. At the fifth drop, of 20
feet, Peter Bosted was rappelling and caught his chin strap in his figure-8
descender. He had a "spelean shunt" on his harness in the form of a
modified Gibbs ascender. This required two hands to put on the rope and
one hand was required to hold the main line - he couldn't tie off the figure-8
with his chin strap caught in it! He did manage to hold the rappel control rope
(main line) in his teeth and get the shunt on. He thus got the chin strap free
but suffered a chipped tooth in the process.
On a later trip a caver got a TSA caving suit hood caught in a rack and
used ascenders to get free.
References:
1) Carol Vesely Personal Communication March 1989.
2) Peter Bosted "Mexico" SFBC Newsletter May 1988, p 6.
De-equipment failure
March, C
Cueva Cheve, Oaxaca, Mexico
On the above mentioned expedition, Mark Minton was rappelling a drop
near the entrance when the locking carabiner holding his rack to his seat
harness got sideways so that the stress came on the gate. The gate had
already unlocked itself. Suddenly the 'biner broke; Minton had his left hand
on the rope above the rack for balance and by reflex, grabbed on. He held
on while he whipped a Jumar attached to his seat harness and clipped it to
the rope above the rack. (Mark Minton, Personal Communication March
1989).
Cc-caver fall
March 28
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
On March 28, a Lechuguilla Cave expedition was in progress. Anne Strait
was doing a climb when a foothold unexpectedly broke. The sudden fall,

---------- Page 9 ----------
though short, caused torn cartilage in a knee. She exited under her own
power, but was limited in mobility for some time. (Anne Strait, Personal
Communication April 1989).
Ac-caver fall
Spring
Neff's Canyon Cave, Utah
A group was descending Neff's Canyon Cave in Utah. At the top of
Corkscrew Pit a caver was making an exposed traverse across a mud slope
when he was forced to stop to wait for a companion. Two cavers watching
this warned him of his precarious position, but he indicated he was fine. A
second later, he slipped, sliding uncontrollably down the slope, being
arrested by the caver he landed on, who "desperately" grabbed a handline
that held him and tangled it in the falling cavers legs, keeping him from going
down the pit. Though he did suffer a knee injury, he was able to exit the cave
assisted by his companions. ("An Accident and a New Room?"
Underground News, Vol 15 no. 1, Jan-Aug 1988, p 12).
Ac-caver fall
April 2
Onyx Cave, Arizona
At the A.R.A./S.W.R. meeting at Onyx Cave in Arizona, a large group of
cavers visited the cave and spent a long time exploring. Most had exited.
The free climb up to the entrance room was only ten feet, but the first step is
very long and had usually been aided by a rock that was now missing. An
etrier had been rigged to provide footholds. With Sue Sparrold at the top of
the climb and another caver in the entrance room, Anita Pape began the
climb. One foot was in an etrier loop a couple of feet off the ground when her
hands slipped from their holds on the flowstone and she fell backwards,
landing on her shoulders and head. She yelled and Sparrold in turn yelled to
the other caver to go and get help; then she climbed down to Pape.
The victim was in pain and a spinal injury was feared. Cavers outside soon
responded and the Southern Arizona Rescue Association of Tucson was
called. At 8:46 the victim complained of a severe headache and it was
discovered that a bandanna tied around her head had been so arranged that
her head took the fall on the knot inside her helmet. Shortly after 10 p.m. a
C-collar and backboard plus vertical gear arrived and a doctor soon after.
The victim was strapped to the backboard by 10:40 and, with the haul
rigging done, she was evacuated, reaching the entrance by 11:50.
References:
1) Sue Sparrold "Watch out for that Impacted Bandanna" Arizona Caver
June 1988, p 2-3.
2) Ray Keeler "Patient Site Log" ibid. p 5-6.
Analysis: Etriers as climbing aids are very tricky. They are really for use in
aid climbing, but end up hung on short pitches as a sort of handline or
ladder. No cable ladder or etrier should be used without a belay. There have
been numerous accidents similar to that described above.
Be-equipment failure
April 5
Ape Cave, Washington
On Tuesday, April 5, a group of eight people visited Ape Cave, about ten
miles northeast of Cougar, Washington. This lava tube is developed for
public visitation with stairs leading down into the cave. The group proceeded
along the unitary tube, but Paul Wolfe (18) and Ryan Jones (20) got ahead
of the rest. They came to the Skylight, an entrance south of the main
upper-end entrance and climbed out. They realized they did't want to do this
and re-entered, but the rest of the group had passed by. The two proceeded
south, heading back toward their original entrance point but their flashlight
batteries died, so they stopped and waited for help about 300 yards from
that entrance.
The rest of the group exited and notified authorities. Personnel from the
North Country Emergency Services responded and found the missing pair,
uninjured, at about 10 p.m. Tuesday. (Ed. "Pair Rescued from Cave After
Lights Fail" Columbian (Vancouver, WA) April 6, 1988).
Ci-illness
April 1988
Crystal Cave, Utah
In April, Dale Clark and three companions visited Crystal Cave near
Wendover, Utah. The cave has no natural entrance and is entered via a
mine tunnel. During the trip a bat and a large rat were encountered and
Clark dipped his mini-mag flashlight in the clear pool to demonstrate the
pool's existence to the others. They then proceeded in another direction,
requiring a climb up a ledge. Clark put the flashlight in his mouth to use both
hands on the climb. They continued without further incident.
Two days later, Clark experienced a severe case of diarrhea that persisted
for weeks, through numerous tests and prescriptions by doctors. This was
finally cured by Bithional, leaving him with a condition called spastic colon,
causing pain and diarrea whenever severe stress occurs. The protozoa
apparently was ingested either from water via the flashlight-in-the-mouth
trick or from rat and bat droppings via the hands to the nose or mouth.
Reference: Dale W. Clark "Lose Weight the Crystal Cave Way" The Inner
Mountain News 20:4, Nov 1988, p 34-36.
De-equipment failure
April 23
Valhalla Pit, Alabama
Late in the evening of Saturday, April 23, Roger Ling was ascending 230
foot Valhalla Pit. He switched his light off and climbed in the gloom of faint
light from companions below. About 170 feet up he took a step with his left
leg - there was a "pop" and the leg suddenly supported no weight. He
crouched on his right leg wondering, then fearing what had happened.
Obviously, the webbing of part of his system (a Mitchell rig - two Jumars
and a box) had failed. If one piece failed, could the rest be far behind?
He switched on his electric and observed that the webbing had worn
completely through where it was tied to the foot loop. He re-tied the broken
end and continued, without further incident.
He realized he had failed to inspect his gear for the past two years and the
one-inch webbing had gradually worn against the two-inch webbing of the
foot loops. He was not in real danger since both Jumars were safetied to his
seat harness, but if the other had failed as well, he would have been left
hanging. Remember that webbing is woven and loses all of its strength
through surface abrasion and should be replaced regularly.
Reference: Roger Ling "Living Dangerously" Speleonews June, 1988, p
50-51.
Cex-fatigue, equipment failure
May 2
Rattling Cave, Tennessee
On May 2, Two cavers visited Rattling Cave in Cooke County, Tennessee.
The cave has a 130 foot entrance pit with a mile of passage leading from the
bottom. The pit was rigged so that the first ten feet was against the wall, the
rest free, using two one-half inch ropes.
This was the third trip for one caver, the seventh for the other. They usually
ascended using a "frog" (a seat ascender and an upper ascender with a
long sling to both feet), but were using a Mitchell or Rope Walker this trip
they had one set of vertical gear between them.
After two hours of exploring, they returned to the entrance pit and one
started up. Twelve feet up he complained of fatigue but continued. He got
110 feet up and complained that he was too fatigued to continue. At this
point, the vertical gear jammed. The climber voiced the opinion that he could
free it if he removed his chest harness. Against advice from the caver below,
he unclipped. Apparently the ascenders were not safetied to his seat

---------- Page 10 ----------
harness - he lost his grip on the rope and inverted, still held to the rope by
the slings to his feet. His helmet saved him from head injury during the
pendulum of inversion.
The climber attempted to right himself but could not. During this, without
warning, he dropped his helmet, light, battery and pack, nearly hitting the
caver below. They exchanged words about this. After 35 minutes of hanging
upside-down, the climber "verbalized his last will and testament" and
prepared to die.
His companion below, in desperation, tied the rope to himself and got into
the low passage leading from the bottom. With great effort, and some pulled
muscles, he was able to force his way along, with his feet on the ceiling of
the passage, thus pulling the climber above fifteen feet sideways, to a small
ledge.
The climber was then able to right himself and secure himself to the rope
while he sent down the vertical gear. The man below ascended and was
able to rig a 4 to 1, Z-type mechanical advantage and lift his exhausted
companion to safety.
Reference: Jeff Cooper "Incident: Heel Hang" undated, 2 pp.
Analysis: Cooper, an EMT and NCRC Newsletter Medical Editor, reports
that unconsciousness can result from five to ten minutes of hanging
upside-down. He strongly recommends not caving with only one companion,
and not sharing equipment. One set of vertical gear is really a poor idea.
De-equipment failure
May
China Pig Hole Cave, Missouri
Laura Jones Guyer was rappelling in China Pig Hole in Missouri when the
nut came off her rack. When she got to the bottom, the release of tension
allowed the bars to simply fall off. Racks should always be set up with the
bars on the closed side of the rack. If the bars are specially made and will
not fit around the curve, get bars that will. (Deb DuMont "Rack Safety"
Meramec Caver July 1988; Laura Guyer NSS Incident Report May, 1989,
1 p).
AAe-equipment failure
June 4
Cottonwood Cave, New Mexico
On Saturday, June 4, four cavers entered Cottonwood Cave in the
Guadalupe Mountains of southern New Mexico. It was evening when the
group attempted a climb into a side lead, about 30 feet up the wall of the
main passage. They erected a "homemade" scaling pole, apparently with a
rope attached. Kenneth C. Hanson (38) then climbed to the top, apparently
with ascenders. The pole then collapsed; Hanson fell, suffering fatal head
injuries. He reportedly was killed instantly.
References:
1) Chris Vaughn "La Luz Man Dies During Cave Outing" Current-Argus
(Carlsbad, NM) June 6, 1988.
2) Larry Sansom "Report of Incident" U.S. Forest Service, Lincoln NF,
Guadalupe R.D., Carlsbad, NM, June 7, 1988, 1 p.
3) Ed. "Obituary" Southwestern Cavers May-June 1988, p 36.
Bo-other
June, A
Reed's Cave, South Dakota
As one of many functions at the 1988 NSS Convention at Hot Springs,
South Dakota, there was a scheduled children's cave trip to Reed's Cave. In
the cave two adults took nine or ten kids of age 7 to 12 in one group, while
another two or three adults followed with a group of younger children (age 4
to 6). Both groups came in the entrance culvert and down a "slippery gravel
slope" into a second room. A separate party of cavers was exiting the cave
at this time and described the children's tour as "disorganized," "an accident
322 NSS News December 1989
waiting to happen" and "a couple of adults loosely surrounded by a
multitude of kids, with more coming every minute."
Apparently several of the kids had non-functioning lights, one was
apparently deaf, some helmets fit poorly and one child was obviously
terrified. Two had to be physically restrained by the separate cavers from
"running around in the cave." Apparently no injuries resulted form this trip.
References:
1) Bruce Hagen "Letters to the Editor" Devil's Advocate Vol 21, No 8, p
63.
2) Vanessa Rennewitz "Editor's Thoughts" ibid. No 7, p 54.
Analysis: Caves are not a playground. Children represent novices of the
most extreme sort - not only do they not know the hazards of the
underground, they do not have the reason, wisdom and emotional stability to
properly judge situations as adults supposedly do. Having adult novices in a
majority may be manageable, but children should be introduced to caving in
a carefully controlled, highly supervised fashion. There seem to be three
measures of irresponsibility here - the NSS, which sponsored it, the adults
who led it, and the parents who allowed their children to participate.
Db-bad air
June, B
Hicks Cave (Hidden River Complex), Kentucky
(Note: This incident is continued in the incident of October 8).
Hicks Cave is a twenty mile long system of essentially horizontal passage
that resurges on the Green River upstream from Mammoth Cave National
Park and extends into the sinkhole plain south of the river for several miles.
The J survey is located far from the Green River entrances. Normally a
stream rises around Station J278 and flows along, dumping into an 8 by 7
foot deep slump pit (in the mud floor) at J247. From 1976 through 1987,
about 15 survey parties passed by and observed a two foot plus deep pool
at the bottom of that slump pit, and no apparent continuation.
A survey party passed by on Memorial Day weekend, 1988 and noticed
that the floor was dry. A drought that Spring (that continued on into the
Summer) had produced low water levels in all caves in the area.
In early June, Phil O'Dell led a team to investigate the J247 pit for a
possible continuation. O'Dell found the climb down to be easy and, beneath
overhanging flowstone, there was a 3 foot high by 1 to 2 foot wide lead. But
within seconds of reaching the bottom of the pit, his carbide lamp flame
turned bright yellow and extended to about 6 to 8 inches in length - the
base of the flame began about 2 inches from the orifice. In less than a
minute he became dizzy, noticed shortness of breath and started suffering a
lack of coordination, "bouncing off the passage walls."
O'Dell realized it was bad air and quickly climbed back up to the J survey
passage where the air was good. After several minutes his breathing
returned to normal. Meanwhile, a companion placed a candle on the floor of
the sump pit - it was extinguished in 15 seconds.
Reference: Tom Ahlers "NSS Accident Report" October 11, 1988, 7 pgs.
Analysis: After doing some library research and talking with State of
Kentucky mining and water experts, it was concluded that the slump pit air
was high in carbon dioxide and low in oxygen. That summer the pit became
a stop on survey trips to demonstrate the bad air.
It was hypothesized that this represented a link with Hidden River, of
Hidden River Cave in Horse Cave City, the terribly polluted cave stream that
seemed to be linked to the rising at Disappointment Lake in Hicks Cave, but
that mainly rises at several springs in the Green River, three to five miles
northwest of the J247 slump pit.
Bce-equipment failure, caver fall
June 11
Roubidoux (Indian) Cave, Missouri
At about 9 a.m. on June 11, Clinton Hooks (27), Erick Olson (22), Daron

---------- Page 11 ----------
Walters (20) and Timothy Butler (20) entered Roubidoux Cave near
Waynesville, Missouri. Olson and Walters were novices and carried
flashlights as their main light source. Hooks and Butler wore electric
headlamps. Only Hooks wore a helmet. They brought no food, water, extra
lights, ropes, or vertical gear. They intended to go the 1,500 feet to the back
of the cave and return.
Toward the end of the cave they encountered a 40 foot pit and Butler was
determined to explore it. He could not be talked out of it. They had found a
muddy manila rope nearby and Butler began to descend, hand-over-hand.
At about 12:30 p.m., Butler was about ten feet down when he lost his grip
and "slid or fell" the 30 feet to the bottom. He was not seriously injured, but
could not climb up. They tried to haul him out using the rope, but could not.
An attempt to fix the rope into a ladder also failed. At about 3:30 p.m. Hooks
told the others to stay there and went for help.
Hooks re-entered the cave at about 6:40 p.m. with a policeman and a
fireman. They attempted to haul the victim up, but failed. Hooks joined the
wait at the top of the pit while the fireman and policeman went for more help.
At 12:05 a.m. Bob Gitchell, a local caver with NCRC training, was
contacted; he arrived at the cave at about 1:45 a.m. with five other cavers.
Those now at the scene had no knowledge of the cave or the location of
the victim. The original policeman and fireman were no longer there and the
only cave map on hand was dated 1962.
At 2:30 a.m. two soldiers from nearby Fort Leonard Wood arrived and one
had assisted on a prior rescue involving the same pit. They organized a
team and went in the cave at 2:55 a.m., with two staying at the entrance for
the arrival of further personnel.
The rescuers had 400 feet of rope, vertical gear, three rescue pulleys, heat
packs, SKED litter and other gear. At about 5:30 they reached the pit. The
victim was given food and water and heat packs were applied. A seat
harness was lowered to him and a haul system was set up. With a belay
applied, Butler was hauled up at 7 a.m., and he and Hooks were able to exit
under their own power by 10 a.m.
Reference: Robert Gitchell "Incident Report" Ozark Speleograph July,
1988, p 2-3.
Analysis: I guess the lesson here is that one shouldn't leave old rope lying
about in caves.
Be-equipment failure
June 12
Scott Hollow Cave, West Virginia
At about 10:30 on Sunday, June 12, three cavers entered Scott Hollow
Cave in West Virginia. These were Cheryl Kenez, Greg Springer, and Jay
Stevens, on a mission to haul gear for the Saturday dive at the Second
Sump. They would carry food in and diving gear out.
At the climbs leading to the Mystic River they met the three divers on their
way out. Shortly before noon they arrived at the First Sump and had a brief
meal. They then began the 30-foot cable ladder climb into the bypass.
Stevens did the climb using a Gibbs shunt to a fixed rope for a belay. Kenez
was the next to go up but found it impossible to climb over the lip of an
overhang 20 feet above the floor. She decided to switch to a rappel, go
down, and use ascenders to climb the belay rope. She attached her rack
and started to rappel. At that point one of her feet slipped from a rung
through the rungs and then caught on two rungs so that she was left hanging
by one foot, upside down.
Springer was right below and heard the fall. He soon had two Jumars with
slings out and Kenez was able to attach herself to the belay rope with these.
The slings were too long, however, to enable her to ascend into an upright
position.
They communicated with Stevens at the top and he lowered a second rope
that had been left coiled at the top. The victim's ankle had begun to hurt
severely. Stevens rappelled to Kenez and forced her foot free of the ladder,
returning her to an upright position. She was able to climb down and had
suffered only a bruise and a sore ankle.
Reference: Greg Springer "Incident at Scott Hollow" Greenbrier Grotto
News Vol 6, no 4, Aug 1988, p 19.
Analysis: Kenez had been attached to the standing line by a Gibbs to her
seat harness and had clipped her rack to the same 'biner. After she fell, the
Gibbs and rack were still attached to the line. Either the 'biner had not been
locked, or it was open just as her foot slipped, allowing the rack and
ascender sling to escape. The foot behind the ladder slipped through and
held her. That is, she was climbing alternating feet - one in the ladder form
the front, the next from the back. It is speculated by Springer that if she had
been climbing only on the front of the ladder, she would have fallen to the
floor. It is unclear, however, if the foot slipped on the ladder causing the fall
or if the lack of attachment to her rappel setup caused the foot to slip
Kenez was praised for her "incredible calm" throughout the incident.
Bl-lost caver
June 16
Cave on Cash Canyon Road, Tennessee
On Thursday, June 16, Craig Lee (23) entered a cave in the 2100 block of
Cash Canyon Road in the Tiftonia area. He explored for a while but became
lost while "looking for another way out." Apparently friends were nearby
about two hours after Lee entered, the Hamilton County Rescue Squad was
called. About twenty squad members, including a team of cavers responded
and found Lee at about 11:30, uninjured.
Reference: Ed. "Man lost in cave found unharmed" The Chattanooga
Times June 17, 1988.
Co-crawl injury
June 18
Lost Creek Cave, Tennessee
On the Saturday morning of June 18, Richard O'Hara (24) and Robert
McDaniel were exploring in Lost Creek Cave in Tennessee. This was the
weekend of the S.E.R.A. Carnival. They proceeded downstream from the
Waterfall to where the borehole passage ended in breakdown. They looked
for a way on and found a crawl. O'Hara was forcing this breakdown crawl
when he suddenly felt pain in one knee. He retreated and found that in a
kneeling position he could put no pressure on it. The knee hurt progressively
worse, the more he used it, but he made the entrance under his own power.
A bit later there was a loud "pop" from the knee and the pain instantly
lessened.
Reference: Richard O'Hara NSS Accident Report undated.
Analysis: Apparently the knee was dislocated or hyperextended. Keep this
in mind - one can break bones, dislocate joints, as well as become
irreversibly stuck, when forcing crawls.
Bo-e!ectric shock
Summer A
Whigpistle Cave, Kentucky
On the Saturday morning of the Kentucky Speleofest, five cavers arrived at
the entrance of Whigpistle Cave, near Mammoth Cave National Park in
Kentucky. The trip was one of the scheduled field trips of the Speleofest.
The cavers had been warned that the landowner has a pump in the pool
just inside the low entrance and that one should not touch the wires or be in
the pool when the pump comes on.
They donned wetsuits and two entered, traversing the pump pool. They
reported "tingling sensations" to those still outside. The leader of the group,
Geary Shindel, went to the owner's house to cut the power. This was done
but the owner was not home so there was no guarantee that the power
would not be turned on after they had entered. One of the two inside came
back out before the power was off and got "shocked" in the process but
apparently was not injured. They abandoned the trip.
Reference: Shari Lydy "Speleofest 88" Birmingham Grotto Newsletter
June 1988, p 3.

---------- Page 12 ----------
Bl-lost cavers
Summer B
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave/Wind Cave System, Wyoming
Late on a Monday afternoon, Scott Smith (18) and Tom Brighten (19) of
Rexburg, Idaho entered Wind Cave in Teton County, Wyoming. They
intended to traverse from Wind Cave to the higher Ice Cave entrance to the
system. This is the opposite of what is usually done since there are several
significant vertical drops that would have to be already rigged for this to be
possible. This had not been done.
Past the first tight crawl in Wind Cave is what is normally an up-climb
which is usually rigged on a preliminary trip when one is planning a thru-trip.
To Smith and Brighten it was a rappel and they executed this and pulled
their rope down after them. They were thus trapped.
They had spoken vaguely of going to the caves so when they failed to
return that night, friends called the Sheriff's Office. Three men were
dispatched to the cave and entered at 6:30 p.m. They found the lost pair four
hours later. They were suffering from mild hypothermia but were able to exit
under their own power.
Reference: Ed. "Two teens safe after cold night" Newsclipping, undated,
unspecified.
Analysis: It must be supposed that the pair had heard that one could do a
thru-trip in the caves and believed the proper direction was Wind Cave to
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave. They are lucky their absence was reported
promptly and that their destination was known, for the temperature of this
breezy cave is just above freezing.
Ac-caver fall
Summer C, 1988
Daniels Cave, Alabama
Nathan Curry (12) was injured when he fell "about 25 feet from a ledge" in
the entrance of Daniels Cave, Cherokee County, Alabama. He was
evacuated by the Cherokee County Rescue Squad. (The Alabama Rescuer
Vol. 23, no 3 July August-Sept 1988)
Do-equipment stolen
Summer D
Cass Cave, West Virginia
A group of cavers was in Cass Cave in West Virginia, and used a 40-foot
piece of orange nylon webbing for a handline on the climb up to the Belay
Loft. When they exited the cave, they found the webbing to be missing. It
had been taken by cavers of another group. The cavers who had placed the
webbing were able to exit safely since they had additional webbing. (Dead
Dog Dispatch Vol. 3, no 10, October, 1988).
Do-snake
Summer E
Lady's Descent Cave, Texas
Three cavers were touring Lady's Descent Cave in Texas and were about
200 feet from the end of this 1,100 foot cave when they encountered a five
foot long snake with "brown.squares on a silvery-looking body." They didn't
get close enough to see if it had rattles. It is likely that the snake was
non-poisonous but it is interesting that it was so far into a cave. (The
Maverick Bull Vol 3 No 9 September 1988, p 8; Sue Bozeman Personal
Communication June 14, 1989).
324 NSS News December 1989
Cr-rockfall
Summer F
Crystal 67 Cave, California
A group of eleven cavers was in Crystal 67, a cave in the western slope of
the Sierras. They reached the Mountain Room in the bottom section of the
cave and spread out, exploring. One group was near the top of the long
rubble slope at one side of the room when one of them dislodged a relatively
small rock or two. There followed a minor chain reaction and larger rocks
become involved, tumbling down the steep slope. They yelled "rock" and
cavers below scrambled for cover. One got under an overhang; a second
lost his footing and went over a short ledge knocking out his light and getting
a bruised shin. A third was hit in the back of the hard hat by a rock and
knocked down slope. He suffered a sprained ankle and a bruised head. The
rocks continued to the bottom but fortunately did not reach the pit there
where two other cavers were. All were able to exit without assistance but the
victim with the sprained ankle had difficulty on flat ground.
Reference: Steve Ruble "Rock!"SFBC Newsletter Aug 1988, p 5.
Analysis: Cavers generally know that they shouldn't climb above someone
or conversely not walk below someone climbing. But in a large group like
this there needs to be some leadership so that the priority of being first
above or first below is established..
The caver with the head injury was wearing a "construction-type" helmet;
the rock actually penetrated the plastic shell, but only slightly, administering
only a bruise to the head.
Remember that a British caver would yell "below!"t which an American
caver would look up and reply "What?"
Cr-rockfall
Summer G
Unspecified Cave, Arizona
On a photo trip, a three foot rock shifted in the "Entombment Maze,"
momentarily trapping J. R. Guthrie by pinning his thigh to the wall. He was
able to scramble out before the rock stabilized, suffering only a large bruise.
(J. R. Guthrie Arizona Caver October 1988).
De-equipment failure


********** July 10, 1988
Grapevine Pit, West Virginia
A group of cavers was doing the 120 foot drop of Grapevine Pit. Al Stubbe
got his shirt eaten by his rappel rack but was able to free it and continue.
(Sonja Ostrander and George Dasher "WVACS Activities report' The West
Virginia Caver Vol 5, No 5, Oct 1988, p 17).
AAc-caver fall


********** July 11, 1988
Levi Cave, Tennessee
On Monday, July 11, a group of 34 youths from the Open Bible Center of
Kankakee, Illinois were on a trip to Florida. Shortly before noon the group
was at Falling Water Falls on Walden's Ridge in Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Half the group visited Levi Cave at that location, while the rest went to a
nearby shopping mall. Not far inside the cave, apparently Mary Beth Gremar
(17) was being helped at a difficult place when she slipped and fell into a 20
foot pit.
At about noon this was reported to the Sheriff's Office and personnel from
the Chattanooga-Hamilton County Rescue Squad and Dallas Bay Volunteer
Fire Department responded. They performed "lifesaving measures" but to
no avail and the victim was pronounced dead of head and abdominal
injuries at the accident site.
The rescuers reported slick and treacherous conditions in the cave and
two rescuers were treated for minor injuries.
Reference: Beverly Carroll "Illinois teen dies in fall during Walden's Ridge

---------- Page 13 ----------
cave expedition" The Chattanooga Times July 12, 1988. Two versions,
same date.
Bf-flood


********** July 17, 1988
Carcass Cave, New Mexico
Late in the morning of July 17 a group of four cavers entered Carcass
Cave in De Baca County, New Mexico. They surveyed a bit, to a breakdown
maze, and decided to tour the larger parts of the cave. In the main passage
they met another group heading out. One of these cavers joined the group of
four.
Two of the cavers had been in the cave before, but it is confusing, with
several loops going to three separate pits at different levels.
The group reached the bottom of Odd Wizard Pit and were discussing the
course to take from there. One went off scouting and returned ten minutes
later having encountered the sudden sound of rushing water and a strong
sulfur smell. The group went and verified this and realized the cave was
flooding. Two went back to the pit while the others investigated further. The
sound of water was soon very apparent coming from passages above them.
There were low, usually muddy crawls between them and the entrance
the group soon reassembled and headed out, in a hurry.
At the first pit they came to, they could look up and see "a substantial
amount" of water coming out of the passage they had entered by. An
alternate route was suggested and they sped on their way. They proceeded
up through breakdown to the top of the pit. They continued out, encountering
no more obstacles except a large pool just inside the entrance. There had
been a fifteen minute cloudburst outside.
Reference: John Stephenson "Carcass Cave, GYPKAP" Southwestern
Cavers Sept-Oct 1988, Vol 26 No 5, p 54.
Co-eye injury


********** July 23, 1988
Cave on Stevens' Farm, West Virginia
Greg Springer went to the farm of Jerry and Elaine Stevens near Union,
West Virginia on the weekend of July 23, arriving at 10 a.m. He intended to
dig at an entrance but was delayed by a six hour rainstorm. Finally, at 4 p.m.
he began to dig, directly above the drain of a large sink. He had previously
felt cold air coming from a hole above a boulder in this sink.
His pick immediately hit trash. He soon had made a hole several feet in
diameter and four feet deep walled by trash on three sides and the boulder
on the fourth. There then appeared two one foot high drains on either side of
the boulder. As he stooped to pull out a large rock in the middle, he
inadvertently pushed his head onto a piece of fence wire sticking out of the
side of the hole. The wire gouged his right eye.
He thought relatively little of this at first, but the following day he awoke to
find his right eye blind. One doctor said it was all right and put a bandage
over it but a second opinion revealed that he had lost an area of the cornea
"nearly as large as a contact lens." He passed out in the second doctor's
office and the injury caused him to miss a week of work, but he has
recovered 20/20 vision in the eye.
Reference: Greg Springer "Hey, Buddy, Can you Spare an Eye?" The
West Virginia Caver Vol. 6, no 5, Oct 1988, p 18.
Be-equipment failure


********** August 8, 1988
Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico
On an August expedition to Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico, a caver was
ascending a 30 foot pit with a rope-walker system when his chest harness
failed and he went upside-down, hanging from his knee and foot Gibbs
ascenders. He apparently was aided by his companions. (Bali Ballmann
Personal Communication September 1988).
Be-equipment failure


********** August 19, 1988
Hell Below Cave, New Mexico
On August 19, two cavers visited Hell Below Cave in the Guadalupe
Mountains of New Mexico. David Locklear was ascending the 60 foot pit; he
was using a Mitchell system with prussik knots instead of Jumars and had no
safety ties from the knots to his seat harness. He furthermore had no
additional knot or ascender ready. Thirty feet up the webbing slipped out of
the buckle of his chest harness - it had been threaded wrong.
When the harness failed, he managed to grab the rope and remain
upright, and yelled to his companion below. The companion came up as
quickly as possible and Locklear made another prussik knot with a spare
sling with one hand while holding himself upright with the other.
With the additional prussik on the rope and safetied to his seat harness, he
was able to rest, upright.
There was a small ledge below Locklear and his partner sat on this, gave
Locklear one of his three ascenders, and helped him piece his chest
harness back together. Locklear then ascended and lowered the borrowed
ascender. They left without further incident.
Reference: David Locklear "Partner Rescue in Hell Below Cave" Habla la
Abuela del Oztotl Vol 6, No. 9, Sep 1988, p 9.
Analysis: If one wants to use knots instead of mechanical ascenders, one
can still, and should, safety them off to the seat harness. Locklear says he
should have had a third ascender already attached to his seat harness and a
light source other than just a flashlight then self-rescue might have been
possible.
Ac-caver fall


********** September 3, 1988
Fort Stanton Cave, New Mexico
At about noon on Saturday, September 3, four cavers visited Fort Stanton
Cave in New Mexico. These were David Irving, Linda Starr, Karen Dennis,
and Lester Sharpton. They intended to do an inventory of a section of the
cave for the B.L.M.
At about 6 p.m. they had competed their work and were heading out,
walking in large, open stream passage. Karen Dennis (41) slipped on a
muddy slope, did the "splits" and slid a ways, suffering a knee injury.
They determined that no bones were broken so the knee was braced by
binding it with webbing and she was helped out of the cave by her
companions. It was later found that she had suffered a "torn medial colateral
ligament."
Reference: Karen Dennis "NSS Accident Report" undated, 2 pg.
Analysis: Karen Dennis gives two contributing factors. She was wearing old
boots with no tread left and in fact had noticed traction problems on the way
in. Furthermore, when their lights grew dim on the way out, they didn't stop
to recarbide, but hurried on in hopes of claiming a free meal from the B.L.M.
Thus the pace was that of the better cavers.
Indeed, cavers often hurry from a cave, for a variety of reasons and this is
usually the time that Darwin smiles - the fit survive and those with light
problems and slick boots become extinct.
Ac-caver fall


********** September 10, 1988
Ain't Barbwire Cave, Arizona
At about noon on Saturday, September 10, two teams of cavers entered
Ain't Barbwire Cave in Arizona. A team of three started surveying in the
upper level near the entrance while Bob Pape and Bruce Thompson went to
the lower level stream passage, also to survey.
The second team finished their work and were exiting the cave. At about
5:30 p.m., about ten minutes from the entrance, Bob Pape was near the top

---------- Page 14 ----------
of the 10 ft climb to the upper level when he apparently lost his holds and
fell. He felt it coming and called to Thompson, but by the time he turned
around, Pape had fallen. Apparently a foothold gave way, or was too
slippery, for the victim landed on his feet but had suffered a dislocated right
shoulder. He landed in a shallow pool but was able to move to the far side;
Thompson quickly down-climbed and checked Pape's condition.
The right arm exhibited great pain and had to be supported to move. He
determined that the collar bone and humerous were not broken and that the
shoulder "had not dislocated ventrally since his upper right chest was not in
pain and there was no evidence of the shoulder joint in his upper right
chest."
After resting a few minutes, Pape tried the climb again but couldn't
manage it with only one arm. Thompson exited and reached the others at
the cars at 6 p.m.
One caver returned to the victim while the rest re-suited for the cave and
got out gear for hauling. The cave is 47 degrees and the victim was
beginning to shiver when the group arrived at the climb. They decided to
have him climb out rather than haul him up and he managed to do this with a
belay, using his left arm and with one caver maintaining his footholds. Thus
his left arm supported him on the left wall and his feet were on the right wall,
moving from hold to hold, kept in place by a fellow caver.
At the entrance the passage is steep and tight and Pape was helped
through by one caver pulling on his left arm from above and another caver
bracing his feet below. They were out by 7 p.m.
References:
1) Bruce Thompson "Accident Report" Arizona Caver Oct 1988, p 3.
2) Bob Pape Personal Communication Dec 26, 1988, 4 pgs.
Analysis: Pape had suffered an anteriorly dislocated shoulder (dislocated in
front of the shoulder blade). The climb where he had fallen is described as
being less than ten feet, overhung, but with good hand holds to where you
can "canyon-walk" or bridge the passage on two ledges, then make the
move to the upper level floor. Thompson states that it probably should be
belayed in the future.
One has to observe that Pape was not injured by the fall, but rather by his
reflex holding of handholds when his footing was lost. Thus it is difficult, in
my view, to find fault with procedure. Short climbs will usually be done
without belay for if you can fall under control, landing on the feet, there is low
probability of serious injury. Perhaps Pape made the analysis most to the
point: "Shit happens."
Bx-exhaustion


********** September 13, 1988
McFalls Cave, New York
On Tuesday, September 13, at 12:15 p.m. six cavers entered McFails
Cave in Cobleskill, New York. These were Mark Gottlieb, Roger Moore, Mike
Cook, Dave Brewer (25), Tom Gangi and Gary Dawson. For Brewer and
Gangi it was the first trip into McFails.
The entrance drop of 67 feet was rigged with a rope. There was just
enough water showering down to make communication difficult. The second
drop feet) was also roped and the third (8 feet) rigged with an etrier.
They proceeded to the first breakdown room and took photos. Brewer
complained of fatigue so they cut short the rest of the trip and headed out.
Brewer needed some assistance at the third drop. He was able to get up the
second with his two-Jumar Texas rig but the climb took a long time and he
was obviously very tired afterwards. His companions could imagine that he
would have great difficulty with the entrance drop.
They arrived at the entrance pit at 3 p.m. Three went on up and one was to
rig a short rope so that he could descend and help Brewer over the lip at the
top. Brewer started up but only got ten feet off the floor. He was told to climb
down and did so, taking 15 exhausting minutes. His companions removed
him from the rope"semi-conscious."
Roger Moore, one of those already up, descended and fitted the victim
with his rope walker, but after some discussion it was decided that Brewer
should not attempt the climb again, for fear that he would become exhausted
part way up and be more of a problem than he already was.
326 NSS News December 1989
Two cavers were left with the victim - carbide lamps, candles and a
space blanket were already there and dry clothes, food and garbage bags
were sent down the pit. The rest went for help. At 4:45 p.m., Emily Davis
Mobley was called and began an alert among Helderburg-Hudson Grotto
members.
The two cavers with the victim were relieved and rescuers from HHG
began to arrive. At 7:20 p.m. Mobley descended and it was decided that
Brewer would attempt to climb out with the ropewalker rig. A second rope
was rigged and Mobley climbed beside the victim, coaching him. He was
able to exit under his own power.
Reference: Mark Gottlieb "Rescue at McFails Cave" Sep 30, 1988, 4 pgs.
Analysis: This was Brewer's first real vertical cave and first wetsuit trip, and
he was reportedly "overweight." The Texas rig he used is more strenuous to
use on free drops than Mitchell or ropewalker but was reportedly commonly
used on the McFails entrance drop. Gottlieb was trip leader and takes
responsibility for including Brewer who obviously was "not ready for the trip."
I would add that it takes time, that is, experience to adjust to the use of a
wetsuit in a cave. One tends to overheat easily and perspire a lot at first but
apparently the body adjusts after some trips. Also, body movements are not
the same in a wetsuit and at first one tends to "fight" the suit, wasting
energy. It helps to thin or eliminate the wetsuit material inside the elbows
and behind the knees - this is where the material bunches up and hinders
movement.
Dr-rock fall
September 24A
Crystal 67, Cave, California
On Saturday, September 24, four cavers were in Crystal 67, a cave in the
western Sierra Nevada Mountains of California. Progress was made in a dig
near the bottom of Canopy Pit. On the way out, two went up the 50 foot pit
and their equipment was passed up the rope. The expected small rocks fell
during this operation, but suddenly there was a "wall-shaking" series of
crashes and the cry of "Rock!" Brandall Suyenobu and Mike Lyvers dove for
cover in the narrow twisting stream passage and escaped being struck.
Reference: Mike Lyvers "Cave Hunt in Crystal 67" The Explorer Dec 1988,
p 147.
AAc-caver fall
September 24 B
Pig Hole Cave, West Virginia
On Saturday, September 24, two students from Virginia Tech, Jeff Snyder
and Rex Linville decided to go caving. They had attended a few VPI Cave
Club meetings but were not members. Still, both were experienced cavers.
At Pig Hole Cave in Giles County, they signed the entrance register and at
10:30 a.m. they entered the Back Entrance. Neither had been in the cave
before, but reportedly had experience in other caves. Jackie Redder Hoell,
the faculty advisor to the Cave Club, was reported as saying: "They weren't
what we call 'nerd cavers' - they were people who knew what they were
doing..." They had MSA helmets with chinstraps and used carbide lamps
and both had fanny packs with extra light sources. Snyder wore tennis shoes
while Linville had lugsole boots.
By noon they arrived at the Mud Bridge; they were unaware of the extent
of the pits in this area. One dropoff was right before them and Snyder
decided to see if he could climb down. This was the 60 foot drop into Hess's
Hollow. They could see a ledge below and Snyder began climbing down
toward this. When he was at eye-level to his starting point, he suddenly fell.
Linville yelled to Snyder and could hear him moaning below. He went for
help.
At 12:30 p.m. he left the cave and contacted the landowner who called
Giles County dispatch and in turn Giles County Rescue Squad. The VPI
Cave Club was also called via the VPI police. Linville could not describe the
area where the fall had taken place and was instructed to go back and wait
at the top of the pit.

---------- Page 15 ----------
Giles County and Newport Fire Department arrived first and sent a team of
two into the cave. Cavers arrived and two rappelled the top entrance and
proceeded to the Mud Bridge, arriving at 1:45 p.m. Four more arrived at 2
p.m. A rope was rigged into Hess's Hollow and two descended. One, an
EMT, took vital signs - there was no pulse and no respiration, pupils fixed
and dilated. The body was cool to the touch, but warmer than the cave.
Hauling systems and personnel were organized and the body was
evacuated, reaching the entrance at 8:30 p.m.
References:
1) Ken Gellman "Caver's fatal slip called tragic accident" The Roanoke
Times & World News.
2) Jackie Redder Hoell "Tragedy in Pig Hole" Tech Troglodite (VPI Cave
Club) Fall, 1988, p 7-9.
Analysis: Some less obvious points bear repeating from Hoell's report. The
helmet came off in the fall and was found eight to ten feet from the victim.
The chin strap had come unhooked on the right side. The cause of death
was given as a "major depressed skull fracture in the left posterior area,
about two fingers wide, four to six inches long." A better helmet might have
kept him alive. The victim also suffered fractures/dislocations of his left
femur/hip and the lower bones in his left leg, as well as other head injuries.
As Hoell says in her Tech Troglodyte report, "Jeff was doing a climb
without a belay in a cave he had never been in before." Unfortunately the
Times article quotes her as saying: "Because they didn't know the cave,
they didn't know there was a pit - I would call this a pure and simple
accident. They did everything by the book, everything they were supposed to
do. It was just one of those tragic things."
Obviously, this analysis is vastly different from the one for the NSS. Why
are non-NSS cavers told, via the newspaper, that tennis shoes and climbing
without a belay are OK? Do we care only about the safety of NSS cavers?
Dr-rockfall
September 24 C
Widow Cave, Oklahoma
On the morning of September 24, two cavers, Ted Blasingame and Sue
Bozeman, went to Widow Cave in Major County, Oklahoma, for a survey trip.
They surveyed some and explored a bit of new passage. At 5:45 p.m. they
headed out, leaving via the Resurgence Entrance. Bozeman climbed they
entrance pitch first. Apparently they had been carrying on a conversation
and Blasingame stood below to continue this.
When Bozeman stepped on a projecting rock, normally used as a foothold,
it
came loose. Blasingame was looking down at that moment and was struck
on the side of the helmet. Blasingame was uninjured but voiced the obvious
lessons of wearing a helmet and not standing below someone climbing.
Reference: Ted Blasingame "Trip Report - Widow Cave" C.O.G. Nizance
(Central Oklahoma Grotto) Oct 7, 1988, p 6.
Bc- caver fall, improper equipment
September 26
Counterfeiter's Cave, Missouri
On September 26, Herbert Samples, Jr. (30) and Kevin Berdak (29)
entered Counterfeiter's Cave in Ha Ha Tonka State Park near Camdenton,
Missouri. Not far inside they came to a dome. Both climbed to a ledge about
13 feet above the floor, inside the dome. At about 3:30 p.m. Berdak "lost his
balance" and fell backwards to the floor and some 35 feet down a steep
slope. He was obviously incapacitated so Samples went for help. At 3:50 he
contacted a park ranger who alerted the Camden County Sheriff's Office.
Ozark Vertical Rope Rescue was called out.
The cave entrance is at the bottom of a large, deep sink. This was rigged
for hauling. Berdak was conscious, complaining of back pain and feeling
very cold. A cervical collar and K.E.D. were applied and he was strapped
into a Stokes litter. With help from Mid-County Fire Department he was
hauled form the sink at 6:45 p.m., and transported to Lake of the Ozarks
General Hospital at 7 p.m., by a "Staff of Life" helicopter. The victim was
found to have suffered a broken lumbar vertebrae.
Reference: Mike Whisman "Incident Report No. 88002" (Ozark Vertical
Rope Rescue) Oct 2, 1988, 6 pgs.
Analysis: This was a restricted part of the park for which the cavers had no
permit. They were equipped with flashlights for light and having to hand-hold
these may have contributed to the fall.
Cc-caver fall


********** October 8, 1988
Gage Caverns, New York
On October 8, a group of French Canadians entered Gage Caverns in
New York State. They had obtained permission. At the bottom of the pit one
of the group, who had removed his helmet and set his flashlight down,
walked off to relieve himself. In the darkness, he stepped over the edge of a
drop and fell 20 feet head first. Luckily, he was not seriously injured (perhaps
it was a sloped drop) and eventually left under his own power. He later
refused medical attention.
Reference: Ed. "Gage Caverns Incident" The Northeastern Caver 19:3,
1988.
Ca-bad air


********** October 8, 1988
Hicks Cave (Hidden River Complex), Kentucky
(Note: This incident is a continuation of that of June, 1988).
At about noon on Saturday, October 8, a party of four cavers entered
twenty-mile long Hicks Cave via the artificial WAR Entrance, several miles
south of the cave's resurgences on the Green River, east of Mammoth Cave
National Park in Kentucky. The four were Tom Ahlers (40) and Duke Hopper
(41) of long-time Hicks experience, and Larry Peterson (40) and Barbara
Graham (22), of relatively lesser experience.
The 85 foot drop leads to essentially horizontal cave so they left their
vertical gear at the bottom of the pit. That entrance was blowing out as it
usually did in cool weather - a simple chimney effect with entrances on the
Green River, about 150 feet lower.
The group planned to get samples of a black material at Q24 and the
stream bed between J278 and J247, for analysis to see if the stream at Q24
was related to the one in the J survey. They collected at Q24 and proceeded
about 2,000 feet, doing the climb down of the 40 foot high J280 dome, to the
second collection site.
At the slump pit at J247, the drought had dried out a pool at the bottom
leaving a lead with bad air (see June B, 1988). This lead was reportedly one
of the last chances for a connection to Hidden River Cave, further upstream
and heavily polluted. Apparently the lead smelled like Hidden River Cave.
They stopped about 5 to 10 feet short of the pit to get out the sample
bottles. Peterson removed his helmet with lamp and his pack. Graham
removed her pack. Hopper set aside his ammo box camera case and also
took off his pack. Ahlers took off his right glove. A "subtle smell,
non-petroleum, not ethyl mercaptan - somewhat like extra-strong mold..
was noticed. Hopper and Ahlers were nearest the pit, with the other two
about 4 to 5 feet further back.
Hopper moved toward the pit with a bottle to collect a sample About 2 to
3 feet from the rim there suddenly appeared a two-foot diameter, bright blue
fireball, near the ceiling, just in front of Hopper's carbide lamp. His
immediate reaction was that his carbide lamp base had split but two seconds
later, the whole area over the slump pit exploded with a loud "whoosh!"
Ahlers was "surrounded by wisps of blue flame" and dove back, landing
with Hopper on the floor, the blue light of the flames the sole illumination in
the passage - all the carbide lights had been blown out. Graham and
Peterson were outside the flames but were so alarmed they immediately
turned and "crawled for it" back up the passage.
Hopper asked if he were on fire and got a "No" for an answer. He and
Ahlers were under the flames, breathing good air near the floor. They started
crawling for their lives, their ears filled with the "low rumble of the passage

---------- Page 16 ----------
on fire." Hopper and Ahlers "crawled the first 40 feet with their noses to the
floor, under a ceiling of fire and heat." Peterson looked back and saw "two
silhouettes crawling in a wall of flame;" he felt a blast of heat and continued
on.
The trailing two got 40 to 50 feet away and paused to look back the
flames were not following them but back at the pit it looked like a "giant
sterno can, burning wall to wall" in the ten foot wide passage. The wall of
solid blue flame started a few inches above the top of the slump pit the
passage rumbled with a "deep steady roar."
Hopper felt burned and Ahlers' right hand and face were warm. Their
companions were out of sight so they shared their one remaining light,
Ahlers' flashlight, and headed for the entrance.
Peterson and Graham waited where the passage gained walking height,
and Hopper and Ahlers soon caught up with them. They inventoried their
gear and re-lit the two remaining carbide lights. Ahlers was the only one
with a pack, with extra carbide and two spare flashlights and an extra
carbide lamp. No one wanted to go back to the slump pit to retrieve gear, so
they headed on out, reaching the surface at about 4:30 p.m.
References:
1) Tom Ahlers 'NSS Accident Report" Oct 11, 1988, 7 pgs.
2) Barbara Graham "Hot Lead in Hick's Cave" The Tech Troglodyte, Fall,
1988, pg 22-24.
Analysis: Hopper had minor burns on his face and Ahlers lost the hair on
his right hand. Both had worn cotton coveralls which had become damp and
were thus relatively less flammable than synthetic might have been.
Peterson had "crawled for it" without his helmet and was very lucky he had
not bashed his head in the panic.
Ahlers speculates that the gas could have been from Hidden River Cave, a
most vile and polluted cave, driven into Hicks by a 3 to 4 inch rain the
previous weekend, or that one of the natural gas or oil wells in the area is
leaking gas.
The alarming part of this is that there was no warning. Pollution may
become more and more of a hazard in caves so keep this in mind.
Ahlers also speculates that if the cave had been blowing normally, with a
good breeze down the J-survey, the gas may not have been allowed to
collect above the hole - had someone then descended, as was planned, or
fallen in, for the edge is a bit tricky, they might well have been unable to get
out when the gas in the pit ignited.
They were also lucky that neither Ahlers nor Hopper breathed any burning
vapor, a common cause of death in fires.
One other point to note, is that since they were expecting bad air, they all
were watching Hopper as he approached the pit and reacted immediately to
the unexpected explosion.
Finally, as Ahlers says, "Good Luck (is) sometimes the most beneficial
factor of all."
Do-rough sea


********** October 14, 1988
Deathtrap Cave, California
Three cavers apparently encountered rough sea conditions on a trip to
Deathtrap Cave, a sea cave on Santa Cruz Island off the coast of California,
receiving a battering within the cave and were "lucky to escape with their
lives." (Ed. "Recent Trips The Explorer December, 1988).
Df-flood


********** Nov 19, 1988
Keystone River Cave, Tennessee
On Saturday, November 19, a group of cavers visited Keystone River
Cave near Spenser, Tennessee on the western edge of the Cumberland
Plateau. They suited up in a hard rain and observed that they were entering
a cave with "River" in its name in bad weather. They entered the cave as
two survey parties, a rigging party and apparently various onlookers.
The cave has a constricted entrance series of passaages before a walking
328 NSS News December 1989
tunnel takes one to the river passage, a 15-20 foot borehole that goes
downstream a ways to a fissure where it plunges through a resistant layer
and has carved a huge chamber in the softer limestone below. One group,
Jack T., Mike R., Andy Porter, and Jeff Bowers, rigged this 246 foot pit and
descended, finding that their rope was just long enough.
They explored and surveyed for some time and returned to the pit eight
hours after entering the cave, to be greeted by a "roaring torrent" of water
coming down. The cave had flooded. They found a sheltered spot between
two breakdown blocks and used garbage bags and carbide lamps to fend off
the chill. When someone got too cold, he would walk around a bit to
generate some heat. It apparently was not safe to even approach the rope
for at intervals they heard sounds "like rocks falling..."
They decided to try to exit at 7 a.m. and got as much sleep as possible. At
the fated hour they decided their condition was gradually deteriorating and
went for it. The rope end was retrieved from the spray and tied to a boulder
to keep it out of the water. Mike R. ascended and re-tied the rope so as to be
more out of the water. It was again re-tied at the bottom and only the last
man, Porter, had to climb with it hanging free, the bottom part in the spray.
The flow was estimated at 20 to 25 cfs.
The river passage was wall-to-wall water, about upper-thigh deep, but
negotiable. The water crawl near the entrance was not sumped and they
exited a little after noon, 26 hours after entering.
Reference: Jeff Bowers "Incident at Keystone River Cave" The Speleotype
Jan-Feb 1989, 23:1 & 2.
Analysis: "This trip proves that it is wise to beware of adverse weather
when entering ANY cave with an active stream."
The bad weather ignored in this case was hurricane Keith, downgraded to
a tropical storm, but which managed to dump four inches of rain in the area
that day and night. The other cavers in the cave had exited just before the
flooding and reportedly were going to wait until Sunday night to call a
rescue. "but nost figured we would get out ourselves, sooner or later."
Ace-caver fall, equipment failure


********** November 20, 1988
Hoya de Guaguas, Mexico
On November 26, a group of cavers was doing Hoya de Guaguas in
Mexico. They were rappelling the 607 foot high side and ascending the 485
foot low side. Two ropes were rigged on the high side for efficiency.
Everything went smoothly until Rob Bissett got about 100 feet from the
bottom. At that point he gave a "startled cry" and his speed of descent
greatly increased.
Cavers ran over and reached him as he got to the bottom. He yelled that
his hands were burned. He had gone over the lip using four "half-diameter
steel bars" on his rack and this was immediately insufficient. He couldn't get
his other two bars on and tried a "leg wrap or two." This worked for a ways
but near the bottom the weight of the rope decreased and he went out of
control. He was wearing bicycling gloves (no fingers) and had blistered the
exposed skin.
His companions had a two-way radio but it refused to work. They yelled up
that they needed first-aid supplies for an injury and the next rappel brought
bandages, creams and even leaves of a native plant that a botanist with
them said would ease the pain and prevent infection.
They removed burned skin with a razor blade and applied the ointment
and bandages, securing them with duct tape. They found an abandoned
pair of large gloves on a ledge and Bissett wore them over his bandages. He
proceeded out under his own power.
Reference: Jay Jorden "A Mexican Black Hole Revisited" The Texas Caver
Feb 1989, pg 4.
Analysis: If you can't test the friction before going over the lip, why not put
on all bars and then take off what is required for proper friction.

---------- Page 17 ----------
Ace- caver fall


********** Dec 10, 1988
Indian Grave Point Cave, Tennessee
On Saturday, December 10, Robert Gardner, a non-NSS caver from
Nashville, Tennessee, and companions visited Indian Grave Point Cave.
In the cave, Gardner was reportedly climbing down a 10 to 12 foot ledge,
using a rope for a handline, when the rope "came untied." He fell and
suffered a fractured leg. The Smithville and DeKalb County Rescue squads
responded and carried out the evacuation. (News clipping, unreferenced,
undated).
Ac-caver fall


********** December 10, 1988
Middle Millerton Lake Cave, California
On December 10, a party of five from the Southern California Grotto visited
the Millerton Lake Caves, a granite talus stream cave system in Fresno
County, California. They thru-tripped the lower cave and intended to do the
same of the middle cave.
At the first pond in that section, Marvin Zaske (32) found he was not tall
enough to bridge or chimney his way across and so was using an
underwater shelf, about two feet below the surface.
At about 3 p.m., when he tried to climb out, he grabbed a hand-hold over
his head when his foot slipped off the polished granite ledge. He tried to hold
on, but could not and went into the pool, ending up on his feet in chest-deep
water. Unfortunately he had dislocated his right shoulder, and required aid to
the entrance and up the 15 foot entrance climb.
Reference: Marvin Zaske NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pgs.
Cc-caver fall


********** Dec 11, 1988
Fisher Ridge Cave, Kentucky
On December 11, three cavers entered the Splash Entrance of the Fisher
Rldge System in central Kentucky. They were armed with a 35 foot,
sectioned scaling pole, to climb the lead at Rainbow Climb in the Big One
area. They had considerable difficulty hauling this through the crawls and in
setting it up. Moreover, it only reached to a steeply sloped, sandy bank near
the top. They were able to dig steps in this and finished the climb, but one
caver "somehow" fell while climbing the pole and suffered bruised ribs. She
was able to exit without assistance. (Dan Crowl "Fisher Ridge Summary"
DUG Scoops8:3 Jan1989).
Be-lost, equipment failure
December 18
Salt Peter Cave, Missouri
At about noon on Saturday, December 18, two boys, age 16, entered Salt
Peter Cave in Stone County, near Galena, Missouri. The cave is rather
difficult with a lot of stoopway, belly crawls, and tight places. They had only
two flashlights and a hand lantern. When the batteries in these grew weak,
they were unable to find their way. They were soaking wet and quickly
became cold in the 58 degree cave.
They had left a note on their car and people knew where they had gone.
When they failed to return, a few relatives and neighbors went to the cave.
They searched for a short way in, but had only flashlights and they turned
back when these began to fail.
About 9 p.m. on Sunday they called the Stone County Sheriff's Office and
several fire departments were alerted and responded to the scene as well as
the Ozark Mountain Volunteer Rescue Team. A rescue team proceeded into
the cave, reaching the boys in 90 minutes. They were cold but "incredibly
calm" and in good condition. They were brought out of the cave about 3 a.m.
on Monday.
Reference: Linda Eardley "Group Saves 2 Stranded in Cave" St. Louis
Post-Dispatch Dec 21, 1988.
Be-lost, equipment failure
December 18 B
Salt Peter Cave, Missouri
On Sunday, December 18, two boys were lost in Salt Peter Cave near
Galena, Missouri. When they failed to return on time, relatives and neighbors
went to the cave and a few armed themselves with flashlights and entered.
When the flashlights began to fail they retreated except for Mike Dahms,
father of one of the boys. He continued until his light failed and then sat
down to wait. He was found by rescuers a couple of hours later and led from
the cave.
Reference: Linda Eardley "Group Saves 2 Stranded in Cave" St. Louis
Post-Dispatch Dec 21, 1988.
CAVE DIVING INCIDENTS
AA-drowning


********** February 7, 1988
Orange Grove Sink, Florida
On Sunday, February 7, three divers entered Orange Grove Sink in
Suwannee County, Florida. They proceeded into the lower cavern. They
used no guideline. John Gillegan (18) led the group. He had a single 80 with
no octopus, a single light (UK600) and was advanced open-water certified
(PADI) with 20 dives over an 18 month period, but was neither cavern nor
cave certified. Followed by one companion, he passed two major
constrictions at the bottom of the cavern, getting into a small chamber.
Apparently he decided to turn back at that point and communicated to his
companion via his slate: "Nothing here, let's leave." His companion
managed to back out of the totally silted condition, but Gillegan tried to
ascend vertically through a tight hole, and ran out of air.
The body was recovered later that day by divers who got directions from
the survivors, reached the location, and, turning their lights out, could see
the glow of Gillegan's light. The body was at a depth of 120 feet.
Reference: Dustin Clesi "Orange Grove Sink Body Recovery" Underwat-
er Speleology February, 1988, pgs 14 - 15.
AA-embolism


********** May 15, 1988
Little Dismal Sink, Florida
On Sunday, May 15, a group of divers was at Little Dismal Sink, in Leon
County, Florida. They were working on the map of the Little Dismal Cave
System; the day's dive was intended to collect survey data for the last bit of
the upstream and downstream tunnels of what is called the Sixth Room
part of the "deep section.' There apparently were three separate parties of
divers in the cave at the same time.
Parker Turner and Shirley Bailey collected rock samples in the First Room,
Bill Gavin motored ahead to the downstream tunnel, and Bill McFaden (32)
and Bill Main went to the upstream tunnel to finish the survey in that area.
The upstream tunnel is low in places and very silty. Main led, laying new
knotted survey line while McFaden followed doing the compass work and
taking notes on the survey slate. At one point McFaden's battery pack fouled
the line and Main swam back to help. A short time later the line was snarled
again, this time on McFaden's safety reel. This was quickly fixed. They
continued the survey. Finally Main signaled to end the survey and they
turned back, Main leading with McFaden close behind. Several times the
visibility was zero and holding the line was necessary. Several times Main
turned around to check on McFaden.
At the Sixth Room, Main turned around but McFaden was not in
sight. "Moments" went by and Main became concerned. As he was about to
go back and check, he saw a light approaching - it was Bill Gavin. He had
finished his downstream survey and was heading for the Fifth Room. Main
swam over and communicated that McFaden was still in the upstream

---------- Page 18 ----------
tunnel. Gavin quickly swam up the line, soon hit clearer water and found
McFaden, off the line but apparently all right. The two rejoined Main, waiting
in the Sixth Room. Everything seemed fine.
All three headed for the Well, the bottom of the Fifth Room. They had been
operating at 220 feet and bottom time had been extended and valuable air
used up in the delay looking for McFaden. At the Well Gavin hooked up to
his "deep-modified DPV" to begin his exit.
At this point McFaden flashed Gavin that he was out of air. Gavin
immediately gave McFaden his long hose and began to share air. Gavin
started up the Well and began venting his drysuit, to moderate his speed.
This had no effect, as McFaden was hanging onto Gavin's manifold and had
lost control of his drysuit. They didn't stop rising until they were in the bell
ceiling of the Fifth Room at a depth of 100 feet. They had risen 80 feet rather
rapidly. Main had grabbed McFaden's legs to try to control the buoyancy
problem. Gavin tried to get McFaden to switch to Main's air but McFaden
would not release the manifold. Gavin was down to 1000 psi and wanted to
head out - it was only 700 feet to the entrance but he was sharing air.
Gavin powered his way down from the Fifth Room bell ceiling with the DPV
with McFaden and Main hanging on. They proceeded through the Fourth
Room, the "Shortcut" and into the Second Room. They were making
progress but McFaden was "breathing hard" and Gavin realized this was
going to be close.
Going through the duck under to the First Room there was another sudden
ascent from 110 feet to 60 feet depth - McFaden's drysuit buoyancy was
still out of control. Main thought about knifing it, but felt that the sudden rush
of cold water into it might panic McFaden and make things worse.
They reached the Balcony and entered the low bedding plane passage
before the restricted portion at the cave entrance. Gavin's regulator started
breathing harder and harder - it occurred to him that even this close to the
entrance they could still drown.
With lungs burning, Gavin looked over at Bill Main and saw that he had
only one regulator - McFaden had switched to Main's long hose. Now two
divers were out of air with the restriction still to go through.
"Main realized that Gavin was hurting badly and quickly gave him his
regulator. Taking three breaths, Gavin was numbed by the lack of air,
stressed and barely coherent."
At this point McFaden let go and they realized he had passed out. Gavin
was concerned he would not make it out alive but Main grabbed Gavin and
in minutes had pulled him through the restriction and to their decompression
stop with oxygen bottles. They went through their very long decompression
burdened by the "mental horror that just took place."
References:
1) Karen Thurston "Cave diver feared dead in accident" Talahassee
Democrat May 16, 1988.
2) Steve Gerrard "We Lost Our Friend" NACD News May-June 1988,
(20)3, pgs 27-30.
3) Ed. "Little Dismal Drowning" Underwater Speleology May/June 1988,
(15)3 p 15.
Analysis: The operating depth of the dive, 220 feet, was extraordinary and
Gavin and Main had been recruited for the survey project because of their
"tremendous experience" with deep dives. McFaden "had done many, many
deeper dives prior to this one." He had logged 40 dives in Little Dismal, 15 at
deeper depths.
An autopsy later showed that McFaden had suffered an embolism in the
brain.
D-equipment lack


********** May 28, 1988
Orange Grove Sink, Florida
Three people entered Orange Grove Sink in Suwannee County, Florida,
on May 28. They were equipped only with masks and fins. Two shared a
scuba tank with two regulators and one had a pony bottle and regulator.
The diver with the pony bottle ran out of air and made a "mad dash" for
the surface. He was almost intercepted by one of the others who tried to
grab his leg. At the surface he was observed by passing cave divers and,
330 NSS News December 1989
though coughing some, apparently had not suffered an embolism.
Reference: Frank Lavelle "Letters to the Editor" Underwater Speleology
July/August 1988, p 25.
AA-drowning


********** June 11, 1988
Blue Springs, Florida
On Saturday, June 11, a group of four divers entered Blue Springs,
Madison County, Florida. Three were U.S. Navy personnel and the fourth
was the teen-age son of one of the group. They were not trained in cave or
cavern diving and had only standard open-water equipment, plus minimal
lights.
They entered the Horseshoe Room "daylight zone" and found the ledge
that leads down into the "Crossunder Tunnel." Three proceeded into the
tunnel for some 350 feet, stirring up silt in the process. They became
disoriented and only one was able to make his way back to the daylight
zone. The other two apparently "followed a jump line laid by cave divers
back to the permanent line, ran out of air, and drowned."
The surviving two (the teen-ager and presumably his father) were able to
recover one body. The other was found by two certified cave divers from
Tallahassee who were exiting the upstream "Main Tunnel" about thirty
minutes after the drowning. While swimming across the Horseshoe Room,
they noticed a scuba tank on the floor at the mouth of the Crossunder
Tunnel (the other report states that the tank was across their line, as if for
staging but they had made no prior agreement with other divers to share
their line, nor was there a line clip, so they became suspicious and looked
around). They expected to find a cave diver but found instead the drowned
diver up near the ceiling.
References:
1) Ed. "Double Drowning at Blue Springs - Madison County" NACD
Newsletter July-August, 1988, p 41.
2) Ed. "On the Darker Side... Underwater Speleology July/August, 1988,
p 22.
AA-drowning


********** June 18, 1988
Arch Spring Cave, Pennsylvania
On June 18, two divers, John Schweyen and Roberta Swicegood (36),
entered Arch Spring, near Altoona, Pennsylvania, to continue work on a
four-year`project trying to link Arch Spring with Tytoona Cave, about 4,000
feet to the southwest.
Tytoona Cave is 3500 feet long to the fourth sump where a boulder choke
blocks further progress. The sumps have lengths of 50, 30, 280 and 100
feet, separated by air-filled sections of passage. The cave is downstream
from Arch Spring.
Arch Spring is 2250 feet long with a 250 foot initial sump (I) reaching a
maximum depth of 35 feet, with an 850 foot canal (airbell) leading to Sump
II. This is 1000 feet in length descending to 70 feet depth about 300 feet in;
near the end it dips to 105 feet depth then ascends to 80 feet in a 50 foot
diameter terminal chamber. This is about 200 feet from Sump IV in Tytoona
Cave. Schweyen had on several occasions attempted, to no avail, to
penetrate the breakdown terminating this chamber.
The water temperatures of these caves is 51 degrees F. and conditions
are normally silty (substantial silt on walls and floor) with visibility of two to
three feet. When exiting from a dive, visibility was usually zero.
Passage dimensions in Arch Spring are usually six to eight feet in width
and height with occasional smaller sections. "The possibility for line traps
exists in several locations, particularly in Sump II where the rock is more
fractured and friable than in Sump l."
On June 18, the divers planned consecutive solo dives to re-survey the
end of Sump II to determine the closest approach to Tytoona Cave.
At 1 p.m. Schweyen entered Sump II and proceeded 700 feet to the end of
a previously laid line of one-eighth-inch braided nylon. There he attached his
No. 18 nylon survey line and proceeded, following more one-eighth-inch

---------- Page 19 ----------
main line, reeling off 190 feet of No. 18 line to a boulder in the center of the
terminal chamber. There were, from there, two lines leading to different
points in the breakdown. Schweyen clipped the reel into the junction lines
and headed back, marking the locations where significant azimuth
deviations occurred. When he exited Sump II, Swicegood was waiting and
entered the sump at 2:50 p.m. while Schweyen continued out of the cave.
Swicegood's job was to take azimuth and depth readings along the line
just laid, then remove it. If gas reserves allowed it, she would check the
breakdown for leads. She had new 95 cubic foot steel tanks with 3000 psi in
one and 2700 psi in the other, giving her more than 190 cubic feet of air. At
moderate work levels this could be expected to last 60 minutes at 70 foot
depth, the average depth of Sump II. Before going in she told Schweyen that
her new USD regulator had suffered a minor freeflow in Sump I which she
had quickly corrected. She also reported that at the entrance she had
temporarily aborted the mission due to an improperly seated O-ring, which
she replaced.
"At 6:15 p.m. Schweyen became concerned when Swicegood failed to
appear." He went to town for backup light batteries, then got his gear on and
dove Sump I to see if Swicegood was stranded there. She was not. He
exited and initiated a rescue alert at the Huntington State Police barracks.
At midnight, Bill Stone in Maryland was called and began to assemble a
rescue team. Schweyen went to Tytoona Cave to dive the sumps there, with
the aid of local divers, to see if Swicegood had made the connection and
was stranded there. She was not. At 5 a.m. the 19th, the dive team was
mobilized and reached the cave by 2 p.m. It was thought that the victim
could be still alive in an air bell. That evening two rescuers penetrated to 690
feet into Sump II, carefully searching as they went. On Monday morning, the
20th, Schweyen located Swicegood's body, ten feet beyond the point where
the new line had been tied off. She was facing into the cave, wedged in a
low section on the south side of the passage just beyond a brief constriction.
Six divers, working in two- and three-man teams, completed the body
recovery by Wednesday night, June 22.
References:
1) Jim Brown, Tom Morris, Rob Parker, John Schweyen, Bill Stone, John
Zumrick "Arch Spring Accident" Underwater Speleology Jan/Feb 1989,
(16)1, pgs 11-14.
2) Joe Prosser "Comments on the Deaths of Bill McFaden and Roberta
Swicegood" NSS News Jan 1989, pgs 23-24.
3) Jacque Grieff "R. Swicegood Rescue/Recovery" Pennsylvania State
Police Incident Report, undated, 26 pgs.
Analysis: The following facts shed some light on the accident scenario:
1) Her tank gauges read zero.
2) She was wedged in the restriction.
3) There were no mechanical problems with her scuba equipment. Both
regulators functioned properly when attached to freshly-charged tanks. This
appears to rule out an uncontrolled second-stage free-flow or the unseating
of a main high-pressure O-ring.
4) Her drysuit had a small rip at the left cuff and a four inch rip on the right
thigh. It was felt that the latter may have been due to the body recovery.
5) Her compass, used for surveying and direction-finding, was found in the
terminal room, close to the point where the survey reel had been tied off.
6) Her dive slate was ruled for survey but only one depth and azimuth
reading had been taken.
7)She was not tangled in the line; her body was found resting on the line.
8) Her depth gauge registered a maximum of 105 feet.
9) The No. 18 line reel was jammed and the line had been cut about one
foot from the reel. The guide line to the terminal room had been pulled
toward the victim - a drop weight originally at the top of a mud rise was now
ten feet downslope, closer to the victim and the entrance.
10) The main line was still intact.
11) The No. 18 survey line was inspected on the surface later. The first
190 feet were marked at the bend locations for subsequent distance
measurement on the surface. The next 270 feet had fresh particulate matter
on it, so this may have been laid and then respooled indicating she went
exploring, but could have been from a previous dive.
12) A previously unknown side passage was later found between the body
and the Terminal Room. If she had been off-line this may have added to her
problems.
13) Rescue diver Rob Parker "reported that the No., 18 line went nearly
straight up from its anchor point just before the constriction where
Swicegood was located, and was taut. Just beyond that point he noticed a
slack piece of No. 18 line hanging vertically to where it touched the floor and
disappeared up the silt slope which extended beyond that point toward the
Terminal Room. This indicated a snag or tie-off near the roof. The previously
unknown passage led off at that point.
The rescue divers (Reference 1) construct the following scenario:
"a) Swicegood passed Schweyen at the start of Sump II (they exchanged
notes and discussed the dive) and proceeded on a nominal dive until a
penetration of 700 feet where the new No. 18 line began. She then began
the survey but aborted it after only one survey shot. Since the compass was
subsequently found in the final chamber it must be assumed that some other
factor caused her to make the decision to abort. This likely was a tear in her
drysuit as she passed the restriction ahead of the survey line tie-off.
Schweyen reported that this area was known to have jagged projections that
could easily snag a drysuit. Schweyen and Swicegood had planned to dive
in Tytoona Cave later that afternoon and the survey reel would be needed
there. It is likely that Roberta made a decision at that point, despite the
drysuit tear, to continue on to the final chamber and recover the reel before
heading out.
"b) Having reached the final chamber she picked up Schweyen's reel and
accidentally dropped the compass (which she normally carried around her
wrist by means of a loose lanyard while surveying). She started out, reeling
back the line in what likely was less than one foot of visibility.
"c) At some point between the 55 foot level and the restriction at 70 feet
(on the way out), she became entangled in the No. 18 survey line (which she
was reeling in). This would not be likely if she had the line in front of her as
she was reeling up, but would have been possible if she had turned around
for some reason so that the survey line was behind her or off to the side.
She may have turned around for any of the following reasons: 1)
Entanglement in the permanent line. This could explain why the drop weight
was out of position as well as a subsequent entanglement in the line she
was reeling in. 2) Buoyancy problems, possibly resulting from an inflator
malfunction (Schweyen reports of experience with sporadic drysuit free-flows
in very silty conditions; in one instance he was momentarily pinned against
the ceiling of a low bedding plane passage) or from momentary overinflation
to compensate for gas loss associated with the drysuit tear(s). This would
also explain the movement of the permanent line drop weight if she had tried
to hold onto it to control her ascent. 3) On the way out, she may have
explored a small side passage just upstream of the restriction at 70 feet. This
had been found a couple of weeks before but had not been fully explored.
"d) In any case, the survey line entanglement was apparently so difficult
that she had to cut it.
"e) The only reasonable explanation for her using all her air was that she
lost both lines somehow. If she was off the permanent line when she cut the
survey line, and if that line snapped away, she would have been lost. Given
the low visibility, the deep silt on the floor, and the lack of good projections
on the walls, her gap reel would have been useless without a drop weight.
"f) She apparently used nearly all her air in the process of looking for the
line. Although she was found on top of the line heading into the cave, she
may have come to rest there after losing consciousness. If she did find the
line, she would not have gone more than 50 to 70 feet in the wrong direction
before realizing that she was going up the slope (and into the cave) or
before she hit the drop weight there, a major landmark for those who have
been in the sump before. This distance is small compared to the 700 feet to
the entrance of the sump.
"g) The survey line going up towards the ceiling just beyond the restriction
may have caught around a projection after she cut the line (under tension)
or, more likely, may have caught if she had been near the passage reported
by Schweyen. If she had been up there exploring, the line could have caught
on a lip."
Joe Prosser (Training Chairman, Cave Diving Section of the NSS) creates
a similar scenario:
"Evidence suggests that Swicegood began her survey as planned.
However, somewhere after Survey Station 1, she lost her compass. Her
survey slate contained notes from Station 1 but no other station, and

---------- Page 20 ----------
her compass was not located during the recovery. At some point, with an
unknown amount of air remaining, she became entangled in the guideline.
When Swicegood cut the line, to evade the entanglement, she failed to
adequately secure the loose end of the line and lost touch with it. With no
guideline and no compass to aid her in choosing a direction for retreat, she
wandered until she ran out of air.
"Evidence found during the recovery, and on a later dive by John
Schweyen, provides at least one explanation of what may have occurred. Of
the four rips found in Swicegood's drysuit, only one can definitely be
linked to the recovery. Two of the tears were near her wrist seals. We
speculate that at least one of these occurred during her traverse of the
restriction. With the seal of her drysuit breached, Swicegood was immersed
in 51 degree F. water. Initially, she elected to continue with the survey and
completed Station 1. Realizing that she was becoming cold, and perhaps
using air faster than anticipated, Swicegood abandoned the survey, but did
not call the dive. Instead, she decided to retrieve the line and reel rather than
leave it for another dive. By the time she got to the reel tie-off point,
hypothermia was beginning to have its effect. Swicegood dropped or lost
her compass while retrieving the reel. Now beginning the final exit,
Swicegood had lost the sure control needed for handling a line and reel in a
sump. When the entanglement occurred, she was unable to eliminate it and
opted to cut the line. With unsure hands, due to the increasing effects of
hypothermia, the exit line was lost. Swicegood's breathing rate was no doubt
increasing as her ability to deal with these added problems was decreasing.
She may have attempted to deploy her safety reel, but cold hands and an
unsure grip could have defeated attempts to deploy this reel.
"Solo diving, regardless of the justification, entails a great deal of risk; the
potential difficulties one may encounter can quickly become life-threatening.
What may well have begun as a simple line entanglement took on
life-threatening proportions when Swicegood lost command of the guideline.
The value of a dive partner under these circumstances must be weighed
against the potential difficulties that the dive partner could present under
other circumstances. Note that while the initial rescue-search for Swicegood
began as solo dives, the final recovery required a team. Recall also that the
recovery team faced far more hostile conditions than did Swicegood when
she began her final dive. This is not meant to be a rekindling of old debates
on the value of a dive partner; it is meant to be a reminder that the decision
to dive solo must be carefully considered before the commitment is made. A
dive partner, under these circumstances, may well have provided the extra
control necessary to deal with the entanglement. A dive partner may also
have added some checks to the decision-making process by electing to call
the dive when problems first began to appear."
The remainder of discussion is from the body-recovery divers (Ref. 1):
"This accident is noteworthy for several reasons. First, Roberta Swicegood
was an NSS trained cave diver with several hundred logged cave dives in
the U.S., Puerto Rico, and the Bahamas. She specialized in sump diving and
had made three previous dives to the final chamber in Arch Spring. She was
experienced in, and comfortable with, cold water and low visibility
environments. Secondly, depth was not a factor in the accident.
"The accident was almost certainly caused by a line entanglement, or a
succession of line entanglements in very low visibility. Hard evidence only
exists for one entanglement (i.e., the cut survey line). Irrespective of losing
the main line, the cause of the accident would appear to be entanglement in,
and subsequent surgery of and ultimate loss of the survey line. Medical
factors were ruled out by an autopsy conducted following the recovery. If we
ask ourselves why Roberta did not come back from this dive, and we believe
that she was lost, the answer is that she could not find the line with enough
air left to get out of the cave. The reason she could not find the line efficiently
was that she could not use her gap reel (since she lacked a drop weight and
there were no nearby tie-offs).
"Given the coldness of the water, extremely limited to zero visibility, and
the fact that wetsuit gloves are necessary, it is debatable that a person under
stress could effectively use a gap reel without immediate recourse to an
easy line tie-off. An apparently necessary safety modification underscored
by this accident is the requirement to carry a drop weight with a quick
connect that can be handled even with wetsuit gloves. This can be used
under any conditions which might exist in the form of floor sediments to
permit the undertaking of a radial search with a minimum of lost time.
332 NSS News December 1989
ARCH SPRING:
SUMP II
TOONA
CAVE
200' ??
SURVEY
compass
DIVE 6-18-28)
Nm
o
FEET
LINE
A'
REEL:
JAMMED
WEIGHT
RESTRUCTION
PERMANENT
To
ENTRANCE
A
700'
TAUT
-A'
A
LINE
R.H.S.

---------- Page 21 ----------
Rehearsal of such drills would serve to reduce stress (and therefore reduce
breathing rate) during a real lost-line emergency. It is recommended that
such lost-line, and drop-weight drills be incorporated into the NSS cave
diving training program.
"All of the dives at Arch Spring, prior to the recovery, were conducted on a
solo basis. The reasons for this will not be debated here, save to say that it
has generally been accepted practice, both in Europe, Britain, and in the
U.S. to dive solo when original exploration or mapping is involved in low
visibility, constricted situations. Swicegood's equipment had been modified
for solo diving (twin K-valves), she was experienced in regulator switching,
and equipment malfunction was apparently not a factor in the accident.
Given near zero visibility conditions it was regarded as highly unlikely that a
partner would have been of assistance.
"The original line strung through the cave was a one-eighth-inch nylon
variety, about twice the thickness of standard Florida line. There were no
markers (arrows, etc.) on the lines in either Sump I or Sump II to indicate the
direction of the entrance prior to arrival of the support diving team. While it is
uncertain what role this lack of directional indicators played during the final
few moments of Roberta's dive (if indeed she had found the main line prior
to losing consciousness), the use of regularly spaced directional markers for
sump diving is clearly indicated. This becomes an even more pressing
requirement in sumps where there are no distinctive landmarks.
"All of the divers involved with the exploration of Arch Spring were
NSS-trained cave divers, and as such learned their technique in Florida.
While the use of one-eighth-inch line represents a step towards addressing
the different environment, it is questioned whether, in fact, a stouter line
might have provided greater safety, given the conditions encountered in
Arch Spring. It may be useful to draw a comparison with British sump diving
practice, where conditions are similar. There, 5/16 inch diameter stranded
polypropylene line is used for guide line. The line is tagged at regular
intervals (3m, 5m, and 10m are common) with different colored bands, for
example, plastic electrical tie-wraps tightened with at least one loop through
the lay of the line to prevent slippage. One color always indicates the
direction of the entrance, and these tags can be felt even with wetsuit
gloves. One could achieve the same effect with a braided line through the
use of a knot code: for example, two closely spaced knots followed by a
single knot, with the single knot on the entrance side or vice versa. This
latter procedure has the advantage of being effective even in zero visibility
since the entrance direction can be felt, even if it cannot be seen. Arrows are
inefficient for this job since they cannot be pre-spooled before the dive.
Larger line has the advantage that entanglements are less likely and easier
to rectify than with small diameter line. In low visibility environments there is
a tendency to place more force on a line, since buoyancy control without a
reference point is less precise. Here again, thicker line is superior. Finally,
there is always risk involved when more than one guideline exists along a
particular passage.
"Although the above scenario and discussion are likely close to what
happened, the exact cause of the accident will never be known. One thing is
certain, however. The myth that NSS certified cave divers are "immune"
from the risks inherent in this endeavor has been shattered. It would appear
that a reassessment of the applicability of certain elements of standard
Florida cave diving practice to other environments (specifically sump diving)
is in order."
AA Chacalal Cave, Mexico


********** June 19, 1988
On June 19, two men undertook a dive in Chacalal Cave at Chacalal
Lagoon near Akumal, Mexico. They intended to recover scuba gear left from
the double fatality of May 3, 1987. They had no cavern or cave training, only
one light apiece, and apparently did not apportion their air in any particular
way. Both were using twin tanks yoked together with only a single outlet.
Their guideline system is described as "bizarre and unorthodox." Apparently
the end of the line was secured at the entrance, then they proceeded with
the lead diver having the line over his shoulder with the second diver
following with the spool. Thus the lead diver acted as a pulley, with the line
going from his shoulder back to the entrance and to the spool.
They proceeded into the cave; apparently about 200 feet in the second
diver panicked. In any case, the lead diver lost the line and the second
headed for the entrance. In the low visibility, silted conditions of the passage,
the leader was lost.
Apparently the second diver exited very quickly and notified an instructor
at the Kapulum Dive Shop who called an American diver, Jim Coke, who
was in the area. They proceeded to the cave immediately, thinking that the
lost diver still had air left. At 6 p.m. they entered the water - two hundred
feet in they encountered the body of the lost diver. He had run out of air and
apparently panicked as he died, since his "fingers appeared to have clawed
at the rock."
The body was recovered as well as the diver's equipment and that from
the fatality of the previous year and all lines previously installed. The cave
and lagoon are now closed to divers.
References:
1) Ed. "On the Darker Side. Underwater Speleology July/August 1988,
(15)4, p 22.
2) Mike Madden "Fatality in Chacalal Cave, Mexico" National Associa-
tion for Cave Diving Jul-Aug, 1988, p 46.
AA - Little River Springs, Florida


********** July 3, 1988
On Sunday, July 3, a diver was exploring solo in the Little River Springs
Cave System. He apparently was not cave or cavern certified and had been
on only 40 dives in the previous twenty years. His body was discovered by
accident the following day by a team of divers from Virginia in the "Mud
Tunnel."
References:
1) Ed. "Drowning at Little River Springs" NACD Newsletter Jul-Aug 1988,
p 41.
2)
Ed.
"On
the Darker Side... Underwater Speleology.
AA - Ottawa River System, Quebec, Canada
July 1988
During the last two weeks of July a cave diving camp was held by the SQS
(Speleological Society of Quebec) at certain springs on islands near the
middle of the Ottawa River just inside the province of Quebec in Canada.
On the 19th of July Jean LaMarree (37) and Luc LeBlanc entered one of
these springs via a small surface pool. They penetrated 90 meters upstream,
laying guideline. The passage was some 2 meters high and 5 meters wide,
with the maximum depth some 6 meters below the surface. At the end of
their line (90 m) they turned back. LaMarree had a minor leak in one of his
regulators and he dismantled and cleaned it after reaching the surface.
They returned to the cave and surveyed the 90 meters. At the end of the
line, LaMarree motioned to LeBlanc to start out. LeBlanc had a minor
problem with the line; when he got sorted out he was no longer sure if
LaMarree was in front or behind - visibility was "poor." He continued to the
entrance but LaMarree was not there. LeBlanc went back to the end of the
line and found LaMarree, dead. His regulator was not in his mouth but his
face mask was in place; there was some blood on it. He brought the body
part way out, but had to leave it when he ran low on air. Body recovery was
completed the next day.
Reference: K. David Sawatzky, MD "Cave Diving Fatality: Jean
LaMarree" Canadian Caver 20(2), Fall 1988, pg 4.
Analysis: LaMarree's regulators were found by the recovery team to be
working and his tanks still contained air.
Sawatzky speculates that LaMarree may have suffered a nose bleed and
suffocated or may have had a heart malfunction - ruptured aneurysm or
ventricular fibrillation and secondary heart attack.
In any case, "this tragic fatality simply reinforces the extreme risk of cave
diving and shows how even a simple event may be fatal in this
environment."

---------- Page 22 ----------
AA Orange Grove Sink, Florida


********** September 5, 1988
At 10:11 p.m. on September 5, Mark Happe and Debi Eaves (21) entered
Orange Grove Sink, Suwannee County, Florida, for their third dive of the
day. Happe was Basic Cave certified in May and Eaves on July 3. When
they discussed their plans for the dive with their instructor and others, they
were warned that they were not ready. Eaves had logged only ten cave
dives and was diving with rental gear.
They planned to head toward Challenge Sink, turning back if silting
occurred. They knew that Eaves' primary light would not last the dive and
they brought a UK 1200 to use when the primary gave out.
The pair proceeded past the halfway point; apparently silting occurred and
they turned back as planned. When Eaves' primary light expired, the UK
1200 was turned on, but during the exchange they drifted away from their
line. With the light on, they turned their attention back to the line and
regained it - but it was not the one they had followed. They used the line for
a time, came to realize it was not correct - a slate note was exchanged -
and turned back. Presently Eaves saw another line and went for it. Silting
had now brought visibility to near zero. Happe made a line search but could
not find Eaves. He then made his way back along the "wrong" line to the
correct line and exited.
Reference: Ed. "Fatality at Orange Grove Sink" Underwater Speleology
Nov-Dec 1988, 15:6, p 5-6.
Analysis:
Underwater Speleology cites: 1) (Lack of) Training - Both divers were
diving well above their level of training. By definition of "Basic Cave"
(certification) they should not have gone to twin tanks nor to diving in the
advanced-cave conditions of Orange Grove Sink. 2) (Lack of a) Continuous
Line - During the exchange of lights they lost sight of the continuous line.
This slight error proved to be a fatal one.
Emerald Sink, Florida


********** December 15, 1988
On December 15, a group of three divers, all "Basic Cave Certified,"
entered Emerald Sink in Wakulla County, Florida. They were led by Bill
Cronin, reportedly having experienced some 100 to 125 cave dives. Cronin
used twin, side-mounted 80's while the others used dual-manifolded double
80's.
They penetrated the cave for some 800 feet, using a line already laid by
other divers and passing one line junction, to a depth of 150 feet, when
Cronin decided they had gone far enough and signaled "turn around." They
began to exit. When they reached the line junction they had passed on the
way in, they proceeded following a line that was marked with exit arrows.
Near the entrance Cronin flashed the other two and signaled that they
were going the wrong way. With misgivings, but because he was the leader,
Cronin's companions turned and followed him back into the cave.
Back at the line junction, "he pointed into a deep tunnel which (actually)
led to Clear Cut Sink, some 5000 feet away. His companions were now
frightened - their air was running low and they were sure the line with the
arrows was correct. They could not convince or perhaps communicate this to
Cronin, however, so they split up, Cronin heading deeper into the cave,. His
companions made it out, but without enough air to complete decompression.
They had oxygen available on the surface and suffered no reported bends
symptoms.
Cronin was found by recovery divers about 300 feet from the entrance at
about 117 foot depth, in a pocket in the ceiling. The guide line at that point
was at 145 foot depth.
Reference: Ed. "Drowning at Emerald Sink" Underwater Speleology
Jan/Feb 1989 (16)1, pgs 6 - 7.
334 NSS News December 1989
Analysis: The maximum on Cronin's depth gauge read 160 feet - this
apparently indicates he proceeded another 200 feet into the cave from the
line junction where his party split up. There was 150 psi in one tank and 350
psi in the other. Both regulators seemed to be "significantly out of
adjustment." The ambient bleeds were both clogged so they would have
"breathed poorly at depth and probably contributed to his (apparently)
probable narcosis."
A good number of safety rules were violated and these are listed here,
quoted from the above source, though one must remember that equipment
malfunction and resulting narcosis is apparently what really caused the
fatality.
"1) Failed to reserve adequate air for the exit. Knowing that they were
entering a siphon, their dive plan was to dive in to 1/3 of their air or 20
minutes, whichever came first. Siphons require additional air reserves
beyond thirds because of increased swimming resistance during exit due to
the siphon flow. Because of this added hazard, siphons are considered
especially deserving of respect and are approached very conservatively by
safety-minded cavers.
2) Exceeded the penetration limits allowed for Basic Cave certifica-
tion. Basic Cave parameters allow a maximum penetration of no more than
1/3 of a single tank or 1/6 of doubles. the dive was planned around 1/3 of
twin 80's.
Exceeded the depth limits allowed for Basic Cave certification. Basic
Cave depth parameters are 100 The planned portion of the dive went to
approximately 150'. It is considered likely that the difficult breathing
resistance of the poorly maintained regulators caused Cronin to be
significantly narked (much more than would be normal) even at this depth.
4) Violated the Basic Cave restriction prohibiting decompression
dives. The dive was planned to be well beyond the no-decompression limits.
Also, decompression bottles were not left at the depth of the first anticipated
stop, which means that the intention was to decompress on emergency-
reserve air.
5) Failure to check gear and/or be familiar with its proper operation.
Checking the ambient first-stage pressure bleeds on Sherwood regulators is
a routine pre-dive check item. The fact that they were not working indicated
either pre-dive forgetfulness or carelessness, or ignorance of the proper
functioning of the regulators. Although Cronin was found to have been using
his operational primary light when he died, tests of his back-up lights showed
that the batteries in all of them were low, and therefore poorly maintained
and not well-checked before the dive.
6) Violated equipment configurations stipulated for Basic Cave.
Cronin was wearing two single 80's attached low on his hips in the British
side-mount fashion, an advanced technique which requires additional hoses
and complicated regulator exchanges and gauge monitoring. It is
hypothesized that the additional stress and time factors associated with
performing the necessary regulator switches may have compromised
Cronin's ability to deal with the narcosis induced by poor regulator
performance, and slowed down his final attempt to exit from the cave. It is
speculated that his chances of surviving the cave dive might have been
enhanced had he been diving a standard dual-valve rig. Side-mounts are an
advanced form of dive technique that are way beyond the scope of anyone
who only has Basic Cave certification.
7) Encouraged other divers to violate the dive parameters of their
certification skills. Cronin was the "leader" on this dive, and though he
knew the others were only Basic Cave certified (like himself), encouraged
them to participate on a deep decompression siphon dive on doubles. It
is reported that on other occasions Cronin had helped other Basic Cave
certified divers rig themselves for side-mount diving and in other ways
"instruct" them in advanced cave-diving techniques. It is also reported that
several instructors, including his Basic Cave instructor, encouraged him
repeatedly to complete the full training course before attempting to do dives
that went beyond the parameters of Basic Cave Diver certification, but to no
avail. It has also been suggested that this was very nearly a triple drowning."

---------- Page 23 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Accident Report Form
Date of Accident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name (s) of person (s)
Age
Sex
Experience
involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving
Accidents" is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
( ) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
(
) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver, weather. equipment. clothing.
etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( )
Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose copies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
Time:
State
Zip
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 24 ----------
BOB & BOB
"Cavers Serving
Worldwide
