
---------- Page 1 ----------
NOVEMBER 1987-Part II
American
Caving
Accidents

---------- Page 2 ----------
November 1987
Volume 44, Number 11
published monthly by The National Speleological Society, Inc., Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, AL 35810. Subscription rate is $15 per year. When changing an
address, give old address as well as new. Second-class postage paid at
Huntsville, AL and additional mailing offices.
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the National Speleological Society,
Inc., Cave Avenue, Huntsville, AL 35810.
COPYRIGHT 1987
All rights reserved. No portion of this manual may be
reproduced without written permission of the National
Speleological Society.
The National Speleological Society
American Caving Accidents
THE BUDDY SYSTEM - be the last to leave the cave
There is a lot of discussion among cavers these days concerning the American
style of SRT versus the European style. European cavers generally rig a drop to
avoid all contact between rock and rope by re-anchoring the rope at each contact
point as one first descends the drop. With a drop split up into segments, it is
obvious that each segment can accommodate a caver at the same time, thus
allowing a party to move up a drop quickly and with very good party unity.
The American system is accorded to be slower for, despite the fact that a single
caver would be faster up an American-rigged drop, the whole party would get up
faster on the European-rigged drop since more than one caver could be moving up
at the same time.
In actual practice however, the American system moves along reasonably
quickly, especially in multi-drop caves, by spreading the party out. But as the party
is extended in this fashion, something must be done to maintain some sort of party
unity. Since this can be just as well applied to any sort of caving, it brings us to the
subject of this essay - the Buddy System.
It is rare that a caving party is of equal strength or speed in traveling the cave,
and rarer still that the strongest brings up the rear, letting the slowest set the pace.
Indeed, I suspect we have all experienced the situation, usually on the way out of
the cave, where someone still feels strong and finds some reason (any reason, I
suspect) to blaze on out. Someone else feels tired and starts falling behind. The
party loses unity and strength. Sometimes this can lead to that party breaking up
into a series of solo cavers.
This would be fine except for the inevitable problem - light malfunction,
ascender difficulties, exhaustion, etc. And the person who suffers most is the
person who can least afford it - that slower, weaker caver who is now bringing up
the rear - for when misfortune befalls him, there is no one to catch up and help, he
is quite on his own.
And why do cavers split off from a group and charge ahead? Why do some cavers
always reach the entrance far ahead of their friends? I'm sure it is natural
exuberance, a demonstration of skill and ability - of strength and stamina.
Perhaps it is just a matter of natural pace. Yet this is also an exhibition of weakness,
for staying with stragglers requires a certain toughness and determination - it
would be so much easier to be out in the sunshine, telling a tale of glory to those
back at camp, than to be still down in the mud and cold, to be thought as slow as
those you are shepherding.
The solution to party unity - and thus to party strength - is clear, and is not
simply the old saw about staying together - that is asking too much, especially in
technically difficult original exploration. Rather, we must make it a rule, just like
adequate light sources, just like proper vertical gear, and hardhats with chin straps,
that each caver in a party is obliged to keep close track of the caver behind him.
386 NSS News: November 1987
STAFF
Editor
Steve Knutson
Production
Mike & Lynne Sims
Advertising Manager
Scott Fee
Cover
Rio Atima Cave, Honduras by Bill Bockstiegel
Back Cover
Rio Atima Cave, Honduras by Steve Knutson
We can call this The Buddy System. Under this rule: When one climbs a pitch,
exits a very tight squeeze or crawl, rappels a pit, or passes any other difficulty that
momentarily slows him, he is no longer free to dash off up the easy passage - he
must wait for a companion to show up before proceeding. The group need not stay
together - would be better not doing so, but each would keep track of the one
behind. The party can move fast but still have unity and strength. Thus, when one
prussiks to the top of a drop, de-rigs from the rope and communicates "off rope" to
his companions below, he does not move on up the cave. Instead he waits; when the
next in line appears, the waiting caver takes off to put some space between himself
and the caver he has just waited for so that the party doesn't bunch up at the next
ascent or other difficulty.
If the ascending caver gets in trouble, he will be much better off with someone
immediately above that he can communicate with, than, as is typically the case,
everyone ahead of him waiting a thousand feet further on, to return to help only if a
half hour or more passes.
This sounds like a lot of preaching and so it is, but I shouldn't be thought of as
holier-than-thou or self-righteous, for I am as guilty of leaving others behind as
anyone. So let's all adopt the Buddy System, and if anyone wants to exhibit real
strength and fortitude, let him be the last to leave the cave.
AMERICAN CAVING ACCIDENTS - 1986
In this compilation of cave exploration safety incidents for 1986, I am utilizing
basically the same classification scheme used for the 1985 issue, as follows:
1. Result of Incident:
Code - Result
Number in 1986
AA - Fatality (body evacuation)
A - Injury with evacuation or aid necessary
B - Evacuation or aid necessary no injury
C - Injury - no evacuation or aid necessary
D - No injury no evacuation or aid
TOTAL

---------- Page 3 ----------
2. Cause of Incident
Code - Cause
Number in 1986
a - acetylene explosion
b - bad air
C - caver fall
d - drowning
e - equipment failure or lack
f - flood
h - hypothermia
i - illness
I - losing the way
r - rockfall
S - stuck caver
X - exhaustion
0 - other
Notice that scuba incidents have been grouped together in a separate category.
There are 9 incident reports including 2 without a fatality. Of the others, there were
a total of 12 fatalities.
In ordinary caving there were 4 fatal incidents. A man fell (or jumped) into
Dante's Descent (300 feet) in Arizona (9-23-86), a drunk tried to free dive a sump in
a cave in which he and friends were partying and exploring (6-15-86), earth fill
blocking a cave entrance collapsed on a caver during a dig to open the cave, and a
caver fell from an exposed traverse after his light went out (11-1-86).
In the breakdown of causes, there are four which collectively represent the
majority of incidents. These are caver fall (24), equipment failure or lack (14),
rockfall (12), and losing the way (8). Let's examine these important categories to
see what sorts of things are happening: (The numbers in parentheses are the date
reference to the incident report).
1. Caver Fall: There were 13 incidents where a caver fell from holds, either
slipping or holds breaking with a variety of results, from bad, incapacitating bruises
to death (1-3, 1-18, 2-26, 3-?, Spring, 5-26, 6-19, 8- 15, Summer, 8-29, 9-23, 10-?,
and 11-7). There were two dislocated shoulders, a dislocated knee, a broken
kneecap, broken toe, head injury, bruised leg, etc. Surely some of these could have
been prevented by use of a belay or handline. There was one incident of a caver
losing his grip on a handline (1-?) and one incident involved driving an ATV into a
pit (3-29). There were four out-of-control rappels. One was of undetermined
cause 5-27), one a carabiner-brake bar was rigged wrong (1-25), one was a single
carabiner-brake bar giving insufficient friction (7-5) and the last was a rack, bent so
that bars could pop off giving insufficient friction (12-28).
There appears to be a myth spreading that carabiner brake bar rappel devices are
"unsuitable for caving. It is related that side loading of the carabiner gate makes
for a weak set-up. These devices have been used in mountaineering and caving for
decades with no failures that I know of. In the early 70's mountaineers tested
carabiner-brake bar devices to destruction and found them good to about 1800
pounds (as I recall. This was reported in Off Belay magazine). It would be very
difficult to generate such a force while rappelling. These devices have their
disadvantages - the only variation in friction one can apply is to use one or two
carabiners-with-bar instead of the complete variability of a rack - but they are
lighter and more compact than a rack and, once attached to the seat harness
carabiner it does not have to be removed each time it is used for rappel, as does a
figure-8. If anyone has any real evidence of carabiner brake bar failures, I would
like to hear about it.
2. Equipment Failure or Lack: The chief culprit here was a lack of proper rope
ascending gear either when the original intention was to hand-over- hand up (3-22,
4-25, 5-17, 11-3) or on an aborted through-trip (3-30). There was also a tubular
nylon chest sling breaking, leaving the climber upside-down (11-30-85), prusik
knots jamming in a waterfall (6-14), light failures (7-19 and 12-15), a bent rack
causing loss of control (12-28), mis-adjusted vertical harness (Fall), ripped stitching
in a foot-Gibbs harness (7-13), shorted batteries producing toxic fumes (7-26), a
breaking manila rope (10-25), and failure of a helmet light with no backup except in
a pack while on a traverse, causing a fatality (8-29).
3. Rockfall: This includes people being trapped or injured by shifting rocks (3-29,
8-23, 9-14, and 11-15), and being injured or frightened by falling rock (1-11, 1-?,
6-22, 7-7, 11-1, 12-6) as well as having rock fall away beneath them (10-?). There
was only one fatality, when a caver was trapped under collapsing fill in a dig (11-1).
4. Losing the Way: Incidents of this type include not being able to find the other
entrance on an attempted through-trip (1-3 and 3-30), a single caver leaving the
group and getting lost (8-2, 8-15, and 9-13) and simply getting lost in a complex
cave (2-16 and 5-?).
Of the other causes there were three carbide explosions (3-29, Summer, and
12-28), three cases of bad air (lack of oxygen due to organic decay, 6-19, toxic fumes
due to a shorting battery, 7-26, and toxic fumes from blasting, 11-?) and two
drowning incidents, one fatal (6-15), the other not (3-?).
It was a good year for floods - there weren't any, though one party was trapped
when increased water flow prevented climbing a rope rigged in a waterfall (11-1).
Hypothermia also was nearly absent with one bad case, where a prusik knot system
jammed in a waterfall (6-14). There were two cases of being stuck, but both were
temporary (1-25 and 10-3). This leaves the other category, which included a rib
separation climbing into a crawlway (3-6), a near-asphyxiation from a gas pump
exhaust (5-2), and a vandalized and jammed lock on a gated cave while a party was
inside (12-27).
Note that in the incident write-ups I almost always do not mention rescuer's
names. These people are heroes and deserve recognition, but mentioning one
would require, in the name of fair-play, mentioning all. This is not the place for it.
The analyses may seem vague and inconclusive at times, but one must remember
that safety margins are different for different cavers. The main reason for this
publication is to show what can happen - how you deal with the possibilities is up
to you.
Please address any criticism, new comments, or information on any incident to:
American Caving Accidents
505 Roosevelt Street
Oregon City, OR 97045
Attention: Steve Knutson
Thank you for your support.
INCIDENT REPORTS -1986
CODE - CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
Be - Fourth of July Cave
AL


********** 11 1985
DI - Little Brush Creek Cave
UT
1-18-86
Cc - Dykes Bottom Cave
KY
2-15-86
Ac - Pettyjohn's Cave
GA
2-26-86
Co - Clover Hollow Cave
VA
3-6-86
Be - Sinkrim Pit
AL
3-22-86
Ac - Un-named Pit
AR
3-29-86
Ble - Cassell Cave
WV
3-30-86
Be - Medville's Mudhole
PA
4-25-86
Ac - Salt Creek Cave
IN
Spring
Bo - Goliath's Cave
MN
5-2-86
Ac - Fulford Cave
CO
5-24-86
Ac - Bishop Cave
TN
5-26-86
Cc - Hell Below Cave
NM
5-27-86
Bhe - Un-named Pit
WA
6-14-86
AAd - Bat Cave
FL
6-15-86
Abc - Bell Cavern
CO
6-19-86
Cc - Cave Hill Saltpeter Pit No. 1
TN
7-5-86
BI - Pleasant Ridge Cave
TN
8-2-86
AAce - Thanksgiving Cave
Canada
8-29-86
BI - McClung's Cave
WV
9-13-86
Ar - Devil's Icebox Cave
MO
9-14-86
AAc - Dante's Descent
AZ
9-23-86
Be - Fisher Ridge Cave System
KY
Fall
Bf - Carpenter-Swago Cave System
WV
11-1-86
AAr - Northfield Caves
MN
11-1-86
Db - Quarry Cave
VT
11-86
LESSER REPORTS
CODE - CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
BI - Crevice Cave
MO
1-3-86
Dr - Sugar Tree Pit
KY
1-11-86
Bc - Sloan's Valley System
KY
1-?-86
Dr - Boundary Pit
KY
1-?-86
Cc - Santa Claus (Pearl) Cave
CA
1-?-86
Dr - Fisher Ridge System
KY
1-?-86
Dc - Breathing Cave
VA
1-18-86
Dcs - Parker's Pit Cave
IN
1-25-86
BI - Bowden Cave
VA
2-16-86
Dc - Sumidero of the Rio Atima
Honduras
3-?-86

---------- Page 4 ----------
Da - Lee Cave
KY
3-29-86
Ar - Moonshiner's Cave
KY
3-29-86
BI - Buckner's Cave
IN
5-?-86
Be - Fulford Cave
CO
5-17-86
Dr - Brussels Hill Pit
WI
6-22-86
Dr - Summer's End Cave
CO
7-7-86
De - Gargantua Cave
Canada
7-13-86
Be - Breathing Cave
VA
7-19-86
Dbe - Knox Cave
NY
7-26-86
Cc - Fulford Cave
CO
Summer
Da - Brokedown Palace Cave
CA
Summer
Cc - Sloan's Valley System
KY
8-15-86
DI - Johnson's Cave
TN
8-15-86
Br - Stompbottom Cave
VA
8-23-86
Bs - Goose Creek (Lost Creek) Cave
CO
10-3-86
Dr - Lazy Day Cave
Canada
10-?-86
Cc - Hell Creek Cave
AR
10-?-86
Be - Johnson's Crook Cave
GA
10-25-86
Be - Shaft Cave
IN
11-3-86
Ac - Dames Cave
FL
11-7-86
Ac - Moler's Cave
WV
11-15-86
Dr - Sloan's Valley System
KY
11-15-86
Cc - Scott Hollow Cave
WV
11-22-86
Cr - Scott Hollow Cave
WV
12-6-86
Be - Howard's Waterfall Cave
GA
12-15-86
Do - Wayne's Cave
IN
12-27-86
Da,c - Rehoboth Church Cave
VA
12-28-86
Be - Sotano de Apetzco
Mexico
12-28-86
DIVING INCIDENTS
CODE - CAVE NAME
LOCATION
DATE
No. of FATALITIES
AA - Kihea Lava Cave
HI
Winter
AA - Morrison Springs
FL
2-1-86
AA - Peacock Springs
FL
3-29-86
B - Fishrock Cave
HI
Spring
AA - Caye Caulker Caverns
Belize
6-2-86
AA - Devil's Ear Spring
FL
8-12-86
AA - Morrison Spring
FL
8-30-86
AA - Royal Springs Cave
FL
10-8-86
De - Crab Creek Cave
FL
Winter
Be Fourth Of July Cave, Alabama
11-30-85
On November 30, four cavers entered a cave northwest of -olly Tree, Alabama
that they had discovered three days before. They later connected it to Fourth of July
Cave, creating the 'People Eater Entrance.' They pushed down a number of small
pit drops and some nasty stream crawls to a crawl that needed enlarging. They
turned back here - one had already gone out so there were three exiting. They
went up a 15 foot drop and two were up the next, a 25 foot, when Gerald Moni had
his top ascender sling (of tubular nylon webbing) break, flipping him upside down.
He was held by his two, lower, prussik knot slings, though he wasn't using chicken
loops, by the tightness of the loops around his boots.
Moni called for help and Marion Smith, just ahead of him, returned quickly but
couldn't do anything. Alan Cressler returned and, since he still had his harness on,
got out enough gear to back down the rope on Jumars to where Moni was hanging.
A jumar was attached by sling and carabiner to Moni's chest harness, then his
prussik knots were released alternately until he was upright again. They proceeded
out.
Reference: Marion Smith "The 'People Eater' Entrance to Fourth of July Cave"
Birmingham Grotto Newsletter July-Aug 1986.
Analysis: A couple of points could be mentioned here. First, sheath (kernmantle)
rope is better for slings than webbing since webbing is woven and abrasion affects
the strength of all fibers. Abrasion on sheath rope affects the strength of the
sheath, not the core. Second, in a vertical system, if the main line passes through
the support to the chest (chest box and harness, 'biner and harness) then results
are not as catastrophic if the upper ascender or knot sling breaks.
388 NSS News: November 1987
DI Little Brush Creek Cave, Utah
1-18-86
On January 18 cavers were active in Little Brush Creek Cave in the Uinta
Mountains of NE Utah. Two cavers, Kevin Roper and Bob Lamph, entered at 9:30
a.m. Another group of five went in and were out at about 8 p.m. These went to
Vernal for dinner and returned to the cave to find the others still inside. At 11:24
p.m. they left a note on the vehicle of the overdue cavers and went to call the
Sheriff.
Search and Rescue was called and outfitted. Cavers would act and guides and
alternating teams were set up. As the rescuers headed for the cave, the lost two
emerged. They had spent from 7 p.m. to 1 a.m. in the area of the H Room looking
for the way out.
Reference: John Halleck "LBCC Near-rescue" Wasatch Grotto News 2(1) Autumn,
1986.
Analysis: This may seem like an over-reaction but in cold alpine settings, anyone in
trouble must be dealt with quickly to prevent hypothermia problems.
Cc Dykes Bottom Cave, Kentucky
2-15-86
At shortly before 2 p.m. on February 15 a group of cavers led by Percy Dougherty
entered Dykes Bottom Cave in Kentucky. They found the first 100 feet of the cave to
be experiencing sub-freezing temperatures, changing the usual sloppy conditions
to hard, slick ice.
Jay Kessel (29) was crawling down the three foot wide by four foot high entrance
passage where the floor was now mostly ice covered. About 20 feet from the
entrance he put his weight on his left arm, his hand on the ice floor. The ice broke
and the short but sudden drop dislocated his shoulder.
Dougherty was able to relocate the shoulder, but continuing pain forced Kessel to
return to wait in the van while the trip went on. He later found that he had also
suffered a broken bone in his shoulder.
References:
1) Doug Stecko Personal Communication 2-28-86.
2) Jay Kessel NSS Accident Report undated.
3) Editor Cave Cricket Gazette (Miami Valley Grotto) 11(3), 4-86.
Analysis: Kessel's shoulder had been dislocated previously and the accumulated
damage may now require surgery. A broken and dislocated shoulder in a crawlway
- dangerous places, these caves!
Ac Pettyjohn's Cave, Georgia
2-26-86
At about 6 p.m. on February 26, Randy Burrage, Wesley Dawson, Allen
Brambell (all 20's) and Wilson Mann, Jr. (19) entered Pettyjohn's Cave in Walker
Mountain, Georgia. They had flashlights and proceeded to explore "several areas
of the cave, then headed back out. At about 7:15 p.m. they were free climbing a 45
foot vertical pitch about 500 feet from the entrance when Mann "slipped and fell"
about feet. The others could hear moans from below so one was sent to get
outside for help while the others downclimbed to give aid.
At a nearby house the authorities were called and various offices were notified
including several cave rescue teams. The first rescuers arrived at the cave at 9 p.m.
and proceeded to the victim. Mann had a laceration on the top of his head and on
his right cheek; the bleeding had stopped. He was conscious and complaining of
pain in his right side. After checking for other injuries, rescuers covered him with
blankets. By the time an EMT arrived hypothermia was evident and oxygen was
requested. He was put on an OSS backboard and moved out of the rockfall zone.
A companion of the victim, Dawson, was now feeling nauseated and showing
signs of hypothermia and was also treated as a victim. The way out was rigged for
hauling.
Meanwhile Mann's condition was deteriorating due to shock and fatigue; more
oxygen and IV's were requested, soon arrived and were administered.
Dawson had recovered so he was belayed up the drop and escorted out of the
cave. They other companions had already been taken out.
The victim was hauled up in a SKED stretcher, re-examined by a physician, put
into a Ferno-Washington litter, tyroleaned over a "deep breakdown area" and
hand-carried the remaining distance to the entrance, arriving at 1:15 a.m.
His injuries were later determined to be only severe bruising.
Reference: Chuck Hans "Incident: Injury" NCRC Newsletter 5-6 1987, p 4.
Analysis: The victim had reportedly been drinking before entering and possibly
during the cave trip. None of the cavers had helmets; they wore street clothes
(pants and short sleeve shirts) and tennis shoes, and had only flashlights for light,
and almost no previous experience in caves.

---------- Page 5 ----------
The rescue was manned by over sixty cavers from the Atlanta, Chattanooga and
Walker County area. It went without a hitch, better than mock rescues practiced
previously in the same cave. Spectators and news media were not a problem,
probably due to contacting agencies in person rather than by radio.
Cc Clover Hollow Cave, Virginia
3-6-86
In the afternoon of Thursday, March 6, four cavers entered Clover Hollow Cave
in Virginia. They descended several drops and proceeded to the end of the stream
passage, staying dry, then visited the Andrews Room.
To go out they had to climb into "a crawlway seven feet above the floor of a small
round room. Craig Schneider (29) pulled himself up and leaned into the crawlway,
resting on his chest and arms. As he pressed with his feet against the wall, sliding
into the passage, there was an audible snap with the sudden onset of chest pain
Schneider had broken a rib. He was able to exit the cave with only slight assistance.
Reference: Rodney Pingree Accident Report undated.
Analysis: A doctor determined that two ribs had parted from the cartilage.
Be Sinkrim Pit, Alabama
3-22-86
In the early afternoon of Saturday, March 22, a small group of friends were at
Sinkrim Pit, (AL800) in Madison County, Alabama. Bob Caraway (32) descended on
a rope 60 feet to a ledge still 35 feet above the bottom of the pit. He could not
continue and was left stranded since he had no ascending gear and couldn't free
climb back up. His friends went for help.
At 5 p.m. Madison County Rescue Squad was called and in turn called cavers.
Rescuers soon arrived. One rappelled down and reported the victim to be OK but
"showing initial signs of hypothermia." Caraway was given instruction in
prussiking while a second rope was rigged and he was fitted with ascending gear.
He prussiked out in 30 minutes accompanied by the rescuer on the other rope. He
arrived at the lip at 7:30 p.m. having been in the pit four and a half hours.
References:
1) Carl Craig Personal Communication 5-20-86.
2) Eric Steenburn "Rescue at Sinkrim Pit" Huntsville Grotto News 28(3), 3-86, p 3.
Ac Un-named Pit, Arkansas
3-29-86
On Saturday, March 29, Randy Carmack (35) and Keith Crawford (15) were
riding an ATV on a dirt road near Morningstar, Arkansas when they either got too
close or had the edge of a sink collapse under the vehicle. In any case, the vehicle
and riders slid and fell 40 feet to the bottom of a pit.
Crawford suffered facial injuries and broke both arms; Carmack received
numerous cuts and bruises. The accident was reported to authorities and the Searcy
County ambulance service and Buffalo National River's Cave and Cliff Rescue
Team responded. Several rescuers rappelled in while a special litter and haul
system was set up. The victims were hauled up, Crawford then being transported to
Little Rock Hospital by helicopter.
Reference: Connie Toops "Park Service Fights Blazes" Harrison Daily Times
3-31-86, p 1.
Analysis: Considering the bad image caves and pits get from this sort of thing, I'd
have to say that this pit was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
Ble Cassell Cave, West Virginia
3-30-86
In the evening of Saturday, March 30, two cavers, Steve Thompson and Robert
Kostrzewa, entered Cassell Cave, Pocahontas County, West Virginia. They had
obtained permission and intended to rappel the old entrance pit, about 95 feet, and
exit another entrance. They were not able to find their other entrance and had not
brought ascending gear. Kostrzewa made a rig from spare sling or climbing rope
and, using prussik knots, successfully ascended (about 7 a.m.). His companion was
"too tired" to follow so the Rescue Squad was called. They called cavers.
Sunday morning a party of cave rescuers arrived and set up a haul system while
one rappelled in to administer first aid if necessary and fit a harness on the victim.
Thompson was hauled up without incident.
Reference: Patty Daw "Easter at Cassell Cave" The West Virginia Caver 4(3),
6-86, p5. Also Personal Communication 4-22-86.
Analysis: Poor planning but a good, though partial, self-rescue. All-or-nothing trips
like this can be big trouble.
Be Melville's Mudhole, Pennsylvania
4-25-86
At about 9 a.m. on Friday morning, April 25, a group of six high school students
entered Melville's Mudhole in Snyder County, Pennsylvania. Three stayed at the
ledge just inside the cave while their companions Paul Neitz (16), Wayne Haines
(17) and Bob Brobeck (16) descended hand-over-hand into a 25 foot pit, landing in
knee-deep mud. During this use, the rope became very muddy and they were
unable to climb up.
Their companions tried tying knots, then loops in the rope to aid their friends;
after three to four hours Haines and Neitz were able to get up. At 1:30 p.m., they
went for help for Brobeck.
The Shanokin Dam Fire Department responded and used a 1:1 direct hauling
system to retrieve Brobeck.
Reference: Dr. R. T. Stanton "Incident: Poor Equipment" NCRC Newsletter 5-6
1987 p 6-7.
Analysis: They had only flashlights and an old manila rope. Since they were cutting
classes to cave explore, they left no word of their destination. Luckily only three
descended. Probably a lot of cavers have done something like this early in their
careers.
Ac Salt Creek Cave, Indiana
Spring 1986
Late one Spring afternoon, four cavers were exploring in Salt Creek Cave in
Bedford, Indiana. They intended to stay only a short time. The initial passage
inside is narrow and tall with ledges along the walls and a stream on the floor. They
pursued this until reaching a crawlway that led on to the major portion of the cave.
There they turned back.
To "add interest," they chimneyed about, high on the ledges. Three had
descended to the stream and two moved on, one waiting for the last, Suzie Mroz, to
descend. She was moving slowly and carefully, testing holds, when a foothold
broke. Her other foot was in mid-step and her hands were ripped from their holds
by the sudden jerk.
Mroz struck walls and protrusions on the way down, taking most of the force of
landing on her left leg. Her head, protected by a Joe Brown helmet, struck a ledge
during the fall with sufficient force to remove and destroy her headlamp. She
passed out from pain.
She was examined for injuries, then carried for a short distance toward the
entrance. She regained consciousness and related the extreme pain in her left knee.
She hobbled the rest of the way out with aid and support from her companions. Her
left kneecap proved to have been fractured.
Reference: Suzie Mroz "Now They Call Me Chester" CIG Newsletter 5-86, p
88-89.
Analysis: I'm sure no one needs to be told that in normal climbing, three points of
support at all times gives a good safety margin - but only if they are truly "points
of support." That is, if you suddenly lose one point, you should be able to hold
yourself with the remaining two. If not, then you should have a belay. To test
potential holds, have no mercy - thump, bash, kick and stomp. Find out if these
little protrusions of rock are going to let you down before you put your well-being in
their trust.
In accidents of this sort, injuries can be aggravated by continued movement or
exertion. Companions who suddenly become rescuers should keep this in mind,
especially since accident victims, possibly to reassure their own minds, like to
believe or pretend that nothing is wrong and will try to continue.
Bo Goliath's Cave, Minnesota
5-2-86
Goliath's is a maze cave with a "significant" stream passage in southeastern
Minnesota. It has seen a good deal of interest in recent years. The entrance is a 200
foot crawl which is sumped much of the year. A second entrance was sought and a
dig was started inside the cave. To help a dig from the outside it was desired to
survey to the dig site inside. In mid-March the entrance sumped. A gasoline pump
was selected to open this sump due to the high rate of stream flow and good
ventilation from a side passage when it is sumped.
At 8:30 p.m. on Friday three cavers, Greg Heideman, Mike Lilja and Jim
Magnussen arrived to carry out this pumping operation. The sump is actually two
sumps separated by 15 feet of passage. It was thought to pump the first Friday
night, let the air clear, then pump the second Saturday, followed by the survey.

---------- Page 6 ----------
The pump was set up by Heideman and Lilja about 20 feet from the water's edge
near Sump 1. They attached the intake hose, started the pump and primed it. The
cave was "drawing a good breeze" which went into the main part of the cave past
the sump via a too-tight side passage about 30 feet before the sump.
It was estimated that the sump held no more than 3000 gallons and should pump
out in 15 minutes. After starting, the output hose was observed to kink so
Heideman and Lilja untangled it "from the spot receiving the fresh air - ahead of
the junction with the side passage."
Before exiting they wanted to verify that the pump was running properly so Lilja
crawled back to check. The pump. had been running for some ten minutes in
relatively stagnant air. After "counting to fifteen" Heideman looked around the
corner to see Lilja squatting by the water's edge. He crawled toward Lilja while
Lilja began to crawl back. Heideman slowed the pump and asked if Lilja was OK
he said yes, but that they should go, as he had a headache. He then fell to his
knees.
Heideman immediately killed the pump. He shook Lilja and insisted they leave.
Lilja replied. "I can't make it. Heideman was suddenly and nearly overcome. At
about 11:15 he gave a futile drag at Lilja and then concentrated on crawling the 150
feet to the entrance. The whole time he had an overwhelming desire to stop and rest
he did not stop.
Fifteen minutes after leaving Lilja, he reached Magnussen at camp. Heideman
refused to go back in and pleaded with Magnussen not to go. Magnussen couldn't
get Lilja out alone, so drove to the house of Steve Landsteiner, the closest caver.
They returned with an oxygen tank from a welding rig. At 11:58 they left the tank at
the sinkhole and crawled in to Lilja. He was lying face down in the water, still
breathing, though very shallowly and with signs of water in his lungs. It was 12:14.
Landsteiner went out to get the oxygen; he got Heideman up to help carry in the
cylinder. This was done and they held the output hose over Lilja's nose and mouth.
They then exited to get a tarp and poles to make a drag-stretcher. Meanwhile,
Heideman was recovering.
At about 12:50 they returned with the tarp and poles and finally, at about 1:45
had dragged the victim out of the cave. At 2:25 they returned with enough
manpower to get him out of the sinkhole, a 40 foot climb. He was rushed to an
emergency room at the hospital in Cresco Iowa. His body temperature was 81
degrees, he had some water in his lungs and a low oxygen blood count.
They were unable, without a respirator, to increase his oxygen level, so he was
flown via emergency helicopter to the Mayo Clinic, where he recovered.
References:
1) Jim Magnussen "Project Update: Goliath's Cave" Minn. Speleology Monthly
18(6), 6-86, p 81-85.
2) Jim Magnussen "Editor's Opinion" ibid. p 80.
3) Larry Laine "Comments on an Accident" ibid. 3-87, p 39-40.
Analysis: Magnussen offers some hindsight criticism:
(1) Don't overlook the value of local cavers and manpower - many can be there
on short notice.
(2) In serious cases like this professional aid should be sought despite bad
publicity.
(3) Never use gas-engined equipment in a cave.
(4) In this case he made the right decision - to return immediately, without
calling extensively for outside aid surely saved Lilja's life.
Larry Laine objects that the use of the gasoline engine was safe enough if the
procedure originally agreed upon had been followed. This was to set the pump and
hose in position, with everyone on the entrance side of the pump, turn it on, and
immediately leave the cave, to return only after the pump had run out of gas and
sufficient time allowed for the passage to ventilate. In any risky activity, bypassing
any part of accepted procedure will generally make the risk greater.
Ac Fulford Cave, Colorado
5-24-86
At 4.p.m. on Saturday, May 24, three cavers entered Fulford Cave, at 10,000 feet
elevation in Colorado. These were Steve Reames, Paul Burger and Pete Funk (29).
It was early in the season for this cave - the entrance was almost snowed in, and
led to a 30 degree, 12 foot ice slope to the top of a 20 foot pit, requiring a rope not
normally needed.
They entered while a fourth companion went hiking. The cave was extremely
drippy from snowmelt but they proceeded to the downstream sump of the stream
passage, then went upstream checking leads. At p.m., at the upstream end, Funk
was climbing an easy ledge to a higher lead while his companions checked other
leads. Suddenly a handhold broke, dropping Funk ten feet; he screamed as he
landed on his back on a breakdown block then rolled and slid another five feet.
His companions found Funk in a small room, "standing in a hole in the floor, his
arms draped over a boulder for support. His helmet had been knocked off and he
had pain in his left leg; water showered down.
Funk tried to move but experienced great pain in his left leg. He was helped a
390 NSS News: November 1987
few feet to a sitting position out of most of the shower. He was given a pain killer
and sheltered with a space blanket. Reames left to call the Eagle County Sheriff's
Office.
At the campground, a camper was sent with a message explaining the situation
to the Sheriff. Three, including Reames, returned to the victim with survival
supplies, arriving at about 10:30 p.m. Vail Search and Rescue and a Sheriff's
deputy arrived, followed by NCRC rescuers at a.m. A phone line to the victim was
established by 6 a.m. Earlier in the night, Funk had been examined by EMT's and
placed in a sleeping bag. He had no apparent injuries but was in a lot of pain. He
was transported to the entrance on a SKED stretcher and hauled up to the surface
via a pulley system, arriving at 10:30 a.m.
References:
1) Mark Tornblom NSS Accident Report undated.
2) Steve Reames "For Real" Rocky Mtn Caving 3(3) Summer 1986, p 22-24.
3) Steve Sims "A successful rescue" ibid. p 24-24.
4) Greg Miller "Fulford Cave Mission Report: Colorado Cave Rescue Network"
ibid. p 25-27.
5) Steve Reames Personal Communication undated.
Analysis: Funk fell only ten feet and was not seriously injured, suffering a deep
bruise of the lower back which pinched nearby nerves causing pain, yet caused a
major rescue. Was this necessary? I don't wish to fault Funk in particular, because
this sort of incident occurs again and again and probably every active caver has
done this - the short climb, with little exposure go for it! But I feel there
is
something that can be done to make this sort of thing much safer.
If the position one has to assume in order to make a short climb is such that a fall
will lead the climber to land in any way but on his feet, then that climber is courting
disaster. Even in this case, one can be "spotted" much as gymnasts are sometimes
spotted - a person stands below, just out of the fall line to break the fall and help
the person land on their feet rather than on their head or back. Obviously this can
be done only on very short climbs.
Reames re-visited the site and found the bedrock to be "a sort of calcified clay
with small embedded pebbles" - weaker than limestone. I find this to be no
excuse. Weak bedrock is often encountered in caves - one must severely test any
hold to which you trust your well-being. If holds are crumbly, then you just can't
hang it out quite so far. Think of the consequences - a ten foot fall, a major rescue.
Ac Bishop Cave, Tennessee
5-26-86
At around noon on May 26, two cavers entered Bishop Cave in Bedford County,
Tennessee. At about 2 p.m., while exploring, Robert Scott Allen (18) "slipped and
fell down a 30 foot shaft.' His friend went for help.
At 2:20 Bedford County Civil Defense was called. A "local rescue team" went to
the cave and began operations. Using a manila rope they attempted to haul the
victim up the pit. Near the top the rope broke dropping the victim 25 feet. They
tried again and were successful. No patient assessment had yet been done.
At p.m. Nashville Grotto Cave Rescue arrived and aided in the evacuation. The
local team had the victim strapped in a Stokes litter with a raincoat covering him.
An oxygen mask had been applied and oxygen was being administered. The oxygen
tank and extra rope were being carried on top of the victim.
A Nashville paramedic stopped the evacuation and did an assessment of the
victim. A rescue blanket and exposure bag were brought in; the victim was
"repackaged" and the evacuation continued. The victim reached the surface at 11
p.m. He had suffered "a head laceration and a possible broken leg."
References:
1) Ed. "Rescue Teams pull injured Shelbyville man from cave" Tennessean
5-27-86.
2) Morris Sullivan Personal Communication 7-2-86.
3) Jim Lawrence "Bishop Cave Incident" NCRC Newsletter July-Aug 1987, p 2-3.
Analysis: As Sullivan states these were "standard flashlight cavers." This
disparity between the equipment used by "casual" cavers and NSS cavers will
probably continue until cavers become more public with their expertise and allow
the public to understand how it is supposed to be done.
Cc Hell Below Cave, New Mexico
5-27-86
On May 27, four cavers were exploring in Hell Below Cave in Lincoln National
Forest in New Mexico. At the second drop, 60 feet, two had rappelled down. At 5
p.m. the third, Eric Pierce (31) apparently suffered an equipment failure and fell
free to the bottom. He landed mainly on his feet, suffering a fractured right heel,
left foot and a twisted left knee. Mud, water and a pack helped to break his fall.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Fearing hypothermia and shock, Pierce's companions decided to do a self-rescue.
The one at the top of the drop exited the cave and ran the half-mile back to camp
and fetched their extra 300 foot rope. Back at the drop they set up a pulley system
and pulled Pierce up. He crawled down a short passage to a 30 foot pitch and was
hoisted up that. He then crawled 75 feet and was carried the remaining 175 feet to
the entrance. The self-rescue had taken five hours.
References:
1) Jay Jorden "Accident Report" Habla la Abuela del Oztotl
2] Julie Gilberto "Man falls 60 feet into Cave" Arlington Star-Telegram 6-5-86, p
19,23.
Analysis: Two of Pierce's companions were veteran cavers; Pierce and the other
were novices but were also fire fighters by profession. All this helps when doing
self-rescue. To carry the victim back to camp, they found a pole, rigged Pierce to it
by his rappel harness, and carried the pole between them.
Bhe Un-named Pit, Washington
6-14-86
At about 3:30 p.m. on June 14, three cavers entered a virgin pit in Whatcom
County, Washington. The pit is at 4400 feet elevation and was at this time taking a
60 gallon per minute stream of snow melt. A 7/16-in. Edelrid rope was rigged, out
of the main water but spray made the bottom 39 feet of this 69 foot pit very wet.
All three descended and started back out - the first made it without difficulty.
At 4 p.m. John Clardy (39) started up using a Gibbs ropewalker set-up; instead of
his usual chest box and floating Gibbs (for safety), he used a prussik knot sling
attached to his seat harness. "Heavy gear was strapped around his waist."
A little way off the floor the prussik knot jammed, stopping him in heavy spray.
He inched up on his Gibbs to work on the knot and suddenly lost his hold on the
rope and went partly upside-down. His "summer caving clothes" were soaked and
cold; he yelled for help. Clardy detached his knee Gibbs and was "levering" the
foot Gibbs down when his companion ascended, found a small ledge and helped
Clardy get upright and free the prussik knot.
A Jumar was sent down and tied close to Clardy's chest; Clardy thought he could
still ascend but managed only a few feet before having to rest. He swung over to a
debris choke for footing, partial de-rig and inspiration.
Clardy sent his companion on up the rope. On the surface he took excess rope,
passed an end down, and the went around the pit to set up a belay. With the new
belay rope attached, Clardy de-rigged from the original rope and free-climbed out,
passing through most of the water flow in the process. On the surface he shook
uncontrollably but was safe. He had been on rope 40 minutes.
Reference: John Clardy Personal Communication 6-15-86.
Analysis: This was a very near thing; Clardy is lucky to be alive. A cold, alpine cave
situation is no place for the wrong kind of equipment and an inferior rig. Use good
thermal underwear and waterproof coveralls or a wetsuit, Jumars (which can be
taken off the rope with one hand) instead of Gibbs, electric headlamps, etc. If one
must use knots, use a good knot (helical, Bachmann, etc.), not a prussik.
Hypothermia - killer of the unprepared.
AAd Bat Cave, Florida
6-15-86
On Sunday, June 15, a group of seven people (ages 18 to 25) entered Bat Cave in
Alachua County, Florida. They had been having a picnic and decided to continue
the party in the cave. They brought over a case of beer with them.
After drinking and exploring for a while, they decided to try a water-filled
passage. Three of them held to each other with the lead man holding the only
flashlight and they pushed into the sump along the right-hand wall. The sump led
to an air-filled passage that connected to the room they had started from. At about
8:40 p.m. Clifford Polete (18) tried to follow them, despite physical attempts to stop
him. He did not re-appear. Several attempts were made to find him, to no avail; a
call made from a nearby house summoned the authorities.
The body was found about 40 feet into the underwater passage, through a
restriction too small for a diver with SCUBA gear. Visibility was zero because of
silt.
References:
1) Paul Smith "Accident Report - Fatality" Personal Communication undated.
2) Edward Barry "Incident Report" undated, 2 pp.
3) Debbie Salamone "Cave diver drowns north of Newberry" Alligator 6-17-86, 2.
Analysis: The victim had reportedly consumed 8 to 10 cans of beer and had no light
when he tried to follow the other three. As he went in he was grabbed by the legs,
but kicked free and continued to his death.
Abc Bell Cavern, Colorado
6-19-86
At about 8:30 p.m. on Thursday, June 19, four teenagers entered Bell Cavern, a
cave known locally as the "Old Weaver Mine," north of Durango, Colorado. About
200 feet inside, Thad Scheer (17) tried exploring an 18-inch diameter vertical
passage; he slipped and became stuck about 10 feet down. One of his companions
went for help and reached the La Plata County Sheriff at 10 p.m.
The cave is at 7500 feet elevation and quite cold; the route to the entrapment was
described as "a rock maze that at times narrowed to a height of two feet."
Apparently Scheer lost consciousness from lack of oxygen only a minute after his
entrapment.
Mine rescue teams from Leadville, Ouray and Silverton were called in and
arrived in force at about a.m. A Silverton team soon entered the cave and at about
a.m. Keith Dahl (29), while trying to enlarge an adjacent hole, lost his hold and
slipped down, falling on top of Scheer; in the fall Dahl struck his head and lost
consciousness.
Oxygen masks were passed down and oxygen administered through tubes soon
brought both back to consciousness. A "human chain" was formed to relay
equipment to the site, including compressed air drills and hammers to open the
passage and allow the trapped pair to be reached and then evacuated. They were
out by 9:30 a.m. Friday, twelve hours after the entrapment. Dahl was diagnosed as
having "a fractured neck and fluid buildup in his lungs."
References:
1) Paula Massa Anderson "Rescuers yank youth alive from cavern" The Denver
Post 6-21-86, p 1.
2) Bill Bocksteigel Personal Communication undated.
3) Larry Blair Personal Communication 6-25-86.
4) Rick Rhinehart "Two Rescued from Bell Cavern near Durango" Rocky Mtn
Caving 10-86, p 10.
Analysis: Apparently neither victim was actually stuck, only disabled, in Scheer's
case by lack of oxygen and Dahl's by the blows to his head. Hypothermia may also
have been a factor. Mine rescue teams are very well equipped and the ready oxygen
may have been a life-saver. In England years ago a caver was trapped in a tight
vertical shaft and asphyxiated.
Cc Cave Hill Saltpeter Tennessee
7-5-86
In the late morning of July 5, a group of cavers were doing an experience trip to
Cave Hill Saltpeter pit #1. There were three very experienced cavers and a group of
trained novices getting their first in-cave pit experience. They were joined by a
caver not of their acquaintance who had equipment and "some experience."
When the unknown caver started his rappel, Bill Baus, one of the experienced
trip leaders, was on the bottom. The pit is 100 feet, 70 feet free but close to the wall.
The unknown caver used a carabiner-brake bar setup. "As he paused to adjust the
rope pad, he lost control and started to descend at near free-fall." He tried
jamming his gloved hand into the rappel device to no avail. Baus, on the bottom,
heard the sound of the fall, applied a bottom belay and stopped the fall just as the
victim reached the bottom. He had suffered "numerous bruises and scrapes from
bouncing off the walls and serious rope burns on his hands and neck."
Reference: J. William Baus "Caving Accident Report" unpublished, 3-1-87, 2 pp.
Analysis: How often do we take someone caving whom we don't really know. This
caver is very lucky that Baus was there and alert. Baus says "When caving,
especially vertical caving, with persons whose capabilities are not well known, one
should be prepared to take precautions which would be appropriate for novices."
It is not known what caused the loss of control. On typical caving ropes
carabiner-brake bars usually show too much friction when two are used. One must
suspect that only one was in use and the friction was thus insufficient. As Baus says
"Once control is lost, even an experienced user may find it impossible to regain
control. This is true of racks or even Figure-8's if a thin rope is used. The only way
to test the available friction on the device you use is to get on rappel and lean back
on the rope anchor before going over the lip; if the rope is rigged right at the edge,
pull some up and lean back on the device attachment in another direction.
If one is rappelling and feels the control leaving, one might start wrapping the
rope around one's body and leg to gain more friction. Don't expect a novice to do
so.
I have heard that some believe carabiner-brake bar setups to be unsuitable for
caving, with an inherent weakness due to side-loading on the carabiner gate. I know
of no failures of these devices which have been in heavy use in mountaineering and
caving for decades. Furthermore, mountaineers did testing-to-destruction of
carabiner-brake bar devices in the early '70's and reported the results in Off Belay
magazine. I don't have the reference but recall the results - the devices destructed
at some 1800 pounds about the same force at which your body starts to destruct,
and much higher than Gibbs, Jumars, etc. In rappelling it is very difficult, even if

---------- Page 8 ----------
you are very sloppy, to generate forces of greater than two or three times body
weight. The notion that carabiner-brake bar setups are inherently unsafe is very
obviously a myth.
BI Pleasant Ridge Cave, Tennessee
8-2-86
On August 2, a group was caving in Pleasant Ridge Cave, Cannon County,
Tennessee. One member of the group, Cory Sepulueda, was adventurous and liked
to split off from the group to check side leads. At some point he left the group
without its taking notice and so the group continued. They were "deep in the cave
before they missed him.' They searched until exhausted, then left, leaving two
members at the entrance in case he came out on his own.
The leader, Mike Bose, returned home where at about 8 p.m. his mother called
East Tennessee Grotto Rescue. Tennessee Emergency Management Agency and
Nashville Grotto Rescue were then called, with rescue personnel soon arriving at
the cave. An initial team of two was sent in to search to Survey Station T-100 and
return.
The cave is complex so two elaborate teams were formed to carry on the search if
necessary. Shortly after midnight these entered the cave. At 1:15 a.m. the initial
group encountered Sepulueda near Station A-100. He was escorted from the cave,
exiting at about 2:30 a.m.
Reference: Jim Lawrence "Emergency Incident Report" Nashville Grotto undated,
3 pp.
Analysis: Sepulueda claims to have informed the party that he was going to check a
lead and they either didn't hear him or left him because of the annoyance he was
causing. In either case, the responsibility for the incident is his. It is clear that he
didn't really communicate with the group - if he had, they would have had the
chance to veto the separation on the grounds that they didn't want to wait.
After separating, his helmet light went out (mechanical failure) and he became
disoriented. When found he was cold and had already burned some of his
equipment to stay warm.
AAce Thanksgiving Cave, British Columbia, Canada
8-29-86
On Friday, August 29, three cavers were surveying in Thanksgiving Cave on
Vancouver Island in British Columbia, Canada. These were Steve Grundy (27), Pat
Shaw (29) and Glen Peppard (22). The trip was part of an annual week-long effort
by Canadian and American cavers, the "Vancouver Island Speleofest."
Peppard was following the other two up a "high chimney traverse" in Suicide
Passage when he had difficulty finding the route; he called to the others and
Grundy backtracked to shine his light on the correct way. Grundy was on a large
chockstone about ten feet above Peppard but out of sight of him. Peppard
acknowledged the route but just then his pack, which was hanging on a tether to his
seat harness, became snagged. When he bent to clear it, his carbide lamp went out.
He related this to Grundy and was heard to "shuffle about," apparently to gain a
position to use both hands to relight the lamp. A moment later (3:15 p.m.) he
slipped, falling to the rocky floor some 20 to 33 feet below.
"Shaw and Grundy quickly descended, finding Peppard helmetless and
breathing heavily, but conscious and complaining of severe pain in the right lower
back and hip. He was also bleeding from superficial cuts to the head and hand."
Shaw stayed with Peppard while Grundy went for help. Before exiting via the
Main Entrance (some 2300 feet away), he ascended the 100 foot Birthday Pot to
advise a five-man survey team there of the situation. Those cavers fetched gear
from an emergency cache at the top of Birthday Pot to the victim to attempt to
stabilize him. Two of their party were also sent to the surface.
p.m. Grundy reached Phil Whitfield in a nearby cave. Whitfield sent word to
the nearest town to request RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) involvement,
an air lift of the VICEG rescue cache at Campbell River (100 miles distant) and a
callout of available cavers.
By 7:30 p.m. the other two who had come from the accident scene had returned
with available exposure gear, medical supplies and food. The RCMP had arrived at
base camp with a radio and an hour later the helicopter arrived with the cache and a
doctor.
At 9 p.m. a SKED stretcher and backboard were taken to the cave via the more
direct 260 foot Staircase Entrance. Before reaching the victim they were met by
cavers who had left Peppard when he died at around 8:30 p.m.
Whitfield recalled the two remaining with the body, putting off body recovery
until the following day. All were out by 2:15 a.m. Saturday.
Using a lot of rigging and hauling systems, the body was brought to the surface
at 1:30 p.m. Saturday. The removal took nine hours. An autopsy stated that death
was caused by internal injuries including a punctured lung resulting from the
crushing and breaking of the right rear of the rib cage.
392 NSS News: November 1987
Reference: Phil Whitfield "Fatal Accident Report" Personal Communication
9-6-86, 3 pp.
Analysis: This was Canada's first fatality in 23 years of organized caving, and only
the second accident to require full victim evacuation. Despite this, the cavers on the
scene were well prepared and organized and their liaison with the authorities was
obviously well established.
Whitfield says, "Peppard had been caving intensively for two years, was a strong
and skillful caver and had encountered no difficulties on the same traverse only
days earlier. While the other team members were temporarily out of sight ahead,
they had no reason to assume that Peppard would require assistance on a climb
with which he was familiar and for which he had already proven competent."
As to the incident, hindsight allows us to suggest improvements - a safety line,
a buddy system just in case someone's light goes out, a second light easily
accessible, etc. But caving trips are, as Whitfield says. "a conspiracy of
circumstances" and practicality versus the idea of "acceptable risk" will dictate for
each caving party just how safe they can or want to be.
It is a good practice to have a second light either helmet mounted (there are very
light-weight ones available) or dangling from one's person. I would also emphasize,
and I cast no aspersions on the members of this caving party, that the last (slowest)
person in a group is often most at hazard, since when he gets in difficulty there is no
one to eventually catch up and help. I am as guilty of leaving people behind as
anyone, but it would be nice if we could all adopt a buddy system whereby you are
assigned to never lose track of the man behind you - he is your "buddy." Thus
you wouldn't leave the top of a free climb or end of a traverse until your buddy, the
guy behind you, arrived. He would do the same for the one behind him. Contrast
this with the usual practice of waiting only occasionally for those who drop behind,
leaving them to traverse difficulties entirely on their own.
BI McClung's Cave, West Virginia
9-13-86
On Saturday, September 13, a group of nine cavers (early 20's) arrived at
McClung's Cave in Greenbriar County, West Virginia. Most had experienced only 3
to 4 cave trips but two were climbers. They planned to split into two parties. A
group of five would enter the horizontal McClung Entrance and go only as far as the
First Breakdown - the other group would enter the newly-discovered, vertical
Lightner Entrance and travel through the cave to join the first group.
A fine, adventurous plan. Unfortunately, their only experience in the cave was as
far as the First Breakdown. None had been in the Lightner Entrance or knew the
route to the First Breakdown. None had even seen a map of the cave. Of the
Lightner Group, only two (the climbers) had any rope experience.
At about 6 p.m. the McClung party entered the cave, proceeding to the First
Breakdown. They waited "an hour or two," left a lit candle and exited.
The Lightner party entered at 6:45. Lightner has a ten foot climbdown, two offset
pits of 40 and 35 feet, a short mud-wallow squeeze, a mud bank with a 12 foot drop
and then the Champagne Squeeze to Tufa Trail. As they descended the drops the
party became strung out. At the 12 foot drop, Jeff Dersch climbed down and went
on ahead. When the others came to the drop, they rigged it and tried to find him;
they checked three possible leads but found no sign. A group went for help while
two stayed there, patrolling the area.
The owner of the McClung Entrance was contacted and he in turn called Ed
Simpson who notified NCRC. Blue Ridge Grotto arrived at about 2 a.m. and four
cavers rigged the drops and descended; they taught the two who were waiting to
use vertical gear which allowed them to exit.
McClung is an extensive, complex cave with two main trunk passages and 16
miles of mapped passage. At 3:30 p.m. three groups of two checked three areas but
found no sign of Dersch, exiting about a.m. At this time a group went in McClung
Entrance on a sweep to Second Breakdown. Another crew went in Lightner's to
check yet another area.
NCRC personnel arrived at 10 a.m. and a complex command post was set up with
various functions delegated. There were about 75 cavers on the scene and more
expected. They were equipped to handle the victim whatever medical condition he
might prove to be in.
Dersch had an electric headlight, a flashlight and spare batteries; he was wearing
jeans, a long underwear top with short sleeved canvas shirt over it and hard hat. He
had no food, water or pack. It was estimated that he would have light until about 6
a.m. Sunday, if he used it continuously. The probability of hypothermia was
growing. If incapacitated when found, getting him out would be a major problem
due to the crawls and climbs to be encountered.
The Command now had to consider strategy - they had searched in all passages
they thought Dersch could reach before his light went out, to no avail. Why? The
possibilities were:
1) He was injured and disabled in a small side lead or down a pit
2) He was moving around and thus eluding searchers
3) He had somehow got into the unstable-rock areas of the north part of the cave,

---------- Page 9 ----------
not yet searched.
They were also experiencing a shortage of search leaders. More were sought;
crews continued to search. At 4:30 p.m. more cavers were called in; by midnight
the 80 to 90 on hand would be exhausted. Cavers would be brought in by
government air transport from the Baltimore/D.C. area, Bloomington, Indiana area
and the southeast.
At 9:05 p.m. a group found Dersch in the Seven Finger's near-loop. He was in
good condition and was escorted out the McClung Entrance. He had been in the
cave for 28 hours.
Reference:
Chris and Bob Amundson "Search and Rescue Operation in McClung Cave" The
West Virginia Caver 4(6) 12-86, p 21-24.
Analysis: Dersch wandered for a while before realizing he was really lost. He found
a room with no air flow and a number of passages leading in and stayed there
sleeping until he got cold, then traversing a loop of cave to warm up and sleeping
again.
The traverse from Lightner's to McClung was a great idea but any such plan
must allow for retreat when something goes wrong; apparently, since they had no
knowledge of the route, they intended to explore their way through.
I think that one of the main disadvantages of a lack of experience is the tendency
to let plans exceed reality. Still, it might have worked out just fine except for
Dersch.
This was the most heavily-manned cave search in this part of the world.
Apparently, it went extremely well - a number of different groups worked
smoothly together.
Dersch's strategy, staying in one place until he got cold, then moving off to get
warm was flawed in that it was the cause of him not being seen by rescuers in the
first sweep at a.m. Sunday. To stay in one place to await rescue is correct; if you
need to exercise to get warm, do it there, don't start traveling.
Ar Devil's Icebox, Missouri
9-14-86
On Saturday, September 14, Gerald Dwayne Easter (17) and a friend were
exploring Devil's Icebox, a cave used as a mine near the top of Pilot Knob in
Missouri. At about p.m. the wall collapsed and a boulder moved, pinning Easter.
His friend suffered only minor scratches and ran to town for help.
Rescue came quickly but the boulder, estimated at 20 tons was in a position to
crush Easter's chest if moved wrong. The freeing of the victim thus took some time.
He was kept sedated and apparently experienced only a couple of spells of panic.
The boulder was pried off at about 9:30 a.m. Sunday. There was reportedly some
concern later that the boy's legs might have to be amputated.
References:
1) AP, UPI "Youth Survives 17-hour Ordeal Pinned by Tons of Rock in Cave" The
Washington Post 9-15-86, p A16.
2) Anon. "Teen freed in Cave" Sacramento Bee 9-15-86.
AAc Dante's Descent, Arizona
9-23-86
Shortly after midnight on Tuesday, September 23, Eugene Campbell (33) died
from a fall into Dante's Descent, a 300 foot deep pit near Ash Fork, Arizona. The
exact circumstances are not known since he was apparently alone when he fell.
Friends came looking for him and spotted his body in the pit.
A few days before, two cavers encountered him at the pit "sitting with his legs
hanging over the edge, looking very despondent and drinking beer." He left and
later, "friends come looking for him, worried that he might commit suicide."
References:
1) Ed. "Fall into sinkhole claims Kingman man" Arizona Republic (in Arizona
Caver) Nov-Dec 1986.
2) Ed. "Death in Dante's Descent" Arizona Caver Nov-Dec 1986 (reported from
Desert Caver no ref.).
Analysis: In the news account, the man was with a friend and fell; the Desert Caver
says he committed suicide. It seems that we will never know which.
Be Fisher Ridge System, Kentucky
Fall 1986
On a trip into the Remington Sink Entrance of the Fisher Ridge System in
Kentucky a group was doing some video taping. When they decided to leave, Joan
Miller tried to use new vertical gear her husband, Steve, had better adjusted for
himself after Joan had successfully practiced with it. She could not make it work.
Finally, in desperation, Steve put on the rig and clipped Joan, via her seat harness,
to his seat harness, and ascended. Joan was able to help a little by pulling on the
rope when Steve was making a step. When they were up high enough to be against
the wall, she found holds to put her weight on and they eventually made it up.
Reference: Joan Miller "Remington Incident" DUG Scoops 5(1) 11-86.
Analysis: No matter how well one person's gear fits another, it is not a good idea to
share. It just complicates a hazardous activity. In this particular situation they
showed good ingenuity and determination to solve the situation, though I would
suggest a more secure attachment of the dependent caver to the hauling caver than
"an ascender which was connected to his seat harness by a short cord. Ascenders
aren't all that strong.
Responsibility for a situation like this rests with both equipment-sharing cavers
and with the group for allowing equipment-sharing. But realistically, it is a rare
caver who has never had an equipment failure that made him dependent to some
extent on his companions.
Bf Carpenter-Swago Cave System, West Virginia
11-1-86
At about 3 p.m. Saturday, November 1 a group of five cavers entered the Swago
Pit Entrance of the Carpenter-Swage Cave System in Pocahontas County, West
Virginia. These were Ryan Carlson [18], the leader, Dan Zeman, Art Yang [16],
Thorin Blanco [19], and Jeff Ewers.
The leader had two to three years of caving experience, the rest little or none,
though one was a rock climber. They had rented helmets and lights [two Justrite
electrics and three carbide lamps]. For vertical gear they had three Figure-8's and
one set of Jumars. They left word of their destination with Ewer's wife but did not
get permission from the landowner. The weather outside was described as a
"lingering rainstorm." They had Xerox copies of a map of the cave.
They rigged the 50 foot entrance drop as far from the waterfall as possible and
proceeded down. About 200 feet further in is a 30 foot falls. Here there is a by-pass
to a higher, dry rig-point. They did not find this and had to rig the waterfall; all
rappelled down, getting soaked in the process. A 300 foot dynamic rope was used
for both drops.
The group continued through the Sewer [one to two feet of air space] and spent
several hours exploring the main, dry part of the cave. At 10 p.m. they returned to
the base of the entrance pitches.
Meanwhile it had been raining and the flow had increased. None could climb the
rope as rigged. Finally, Zeman, the rock climber, rigged the rope for a diagonal
Tyrolean traverse ascent and was able to climb out. He found the dry bypass above
but considered it too exposed to use to re-rig the rope.
Zeman decided it was too dangerous for the others to attempt climbing up the
waterfall and SO pulled up the rope. He yelled for them to go back to the dry part
and wait. He then Jumared up the entrance pit and went for help.
The others were cold and tired. They had little food, were dressed in cotton and
were of small, thin stature. They proceeded to burn their spare carbide in the open
to gain warmth.
At 1:30 a.m. Zeman contacted the West Virginia State Police at Marlinton. At
2:30 a.m. they got hold of Jerry Kyle. The word was spread and at around 6 a.m.
properly equipped cavers began arriving at the entrance. At 6:44, wet-suited
rescuers entered with sleeping bags, blankets, hot drinks, heat packs and food.
They re-rigged the drop and at 7:30 a.m. reached the victims.
At 9 a.m. the first victim was hauled up the 30 foot drop via the dry bypass. The
last exited the cave at 10 a.m. They were examined at Pocahontas Memorial
Hospital and released.
References:
1) Jerry Kyle "Rescue at Swago Pit" The West Virginia Caver 4(6) 12-86, p 20-21.
2) George Dasher Personal Communication 11-14-86.
Analysis: The group was very poorly equipped for wet caving. Still, when things
went bad, they made some good decisions and this may very well have prevented a
fatality. The use of their spare carbide was very inefficient. Going in a waterfall
entrance in bad weather is very foolish.
AAr Northfield Caves, Minnesota
11-1-86
On Saturday five students from St. Olaf's College were digging in the entrance of
a cave in Northfield, Minnesota. They had tunnelled in about 15 feet through dirt
with their hands and a pail when, at about midnight, the fill above collapsed.
Thomas E. Johnson (20) was trapped - three others were just inside while the fifth
was outside. The body was recovered at about 1:30 a.m. by rescue workers; he was
pronounced dead at the scene.
References:
1) Lydia Villalva "Cave collapse kills student at St. Olaf" St. Paul Pioneer Press &
Dispatch 11-2-86, p 1C.
2) Calvin Alexander Personal Communication 11-6-86.
Analysis: The fill that collapsed had been put in the entrance to close it some eight
years before; the actual ceiling of the cave didn't collapse.
Db Quarry Cave, Vermont
November 1986
On Thanksgiving weekend Peter Quick entered Quarry Cave in Vermont to try
some blasting. To get to the blast site requires traverse of 300 feet of passage, the
last 70 feet being tight crawl leading to a low room. Quick used seven "TNT primer
charges. The site had consumed 28 sticks of dynamite in five previous blasts. He

---------- Page 10 ----------
set up the charge and ran the wire out the entrance into the quarry. The charge
went off and Quick took a hike for two and a half hours to let the fumes dissipate
there is little air flow in the cave. There was snow on the ground and night was
coming.
At the blast site the results were apparent but not quite enough to open the lead.
As he examined the site his eyes started to burn. There was no visible smoke or
odor but it was obvious that there were still fumes present. He backed out of the
lead but felt dizzy when he sat up. He felt panicky about passing out in the midst of
the fumes so he set out for the entrance; his arms and legs felt numb. His wallet
and keys were in his pack so it had to come too. He exited and trudged through the
snow, down the mountain to his truck. His head and lungs ached but this passed
and he recovered.
Reference: Peter Quick "Sudden Impact" DUG Scoops 5(4) 2-87.
Analysis: In blasting with dynamite one must give the resultant fumes great
respect. They are reputed to give an effect that is gradually deteriorating; the
effects, assuming you are not killed outright (which is possible if the assimilated
dose is great enough), may "merely" shorten your life a bit. If someone says "The
fumes don't hurt you, I've breathed a lot of 'em!", don't believe it - that person
will probably not live as long as he would have otherwise.
A good procedure in blasting is to shoot the charge and, if there is little
appropriate air flow, come back the next day. Also, one will lessen fumes by
lessening the charge used. This can be done by always using a shaped charge
never use whole sticks. Shaped charges are easily made by packing the blasting
compound in a funnel with the cap at the apex of the cone, in the stem of the funnel.
The large end of the funnel (with plastic taped on to keep the compound in) is
placed against the offending rock.
Some explosives, it should be noted, do not produce poisonous fumes.
MINOR INCIDENTS
Dr Sugar Tree Pit, Kentucky
1-11-86
Three cavers were surveying in this cave in Pulaski County. Beyond the "second
pit" Phil O'Dell was nearly hit by a "small breakdown slab' that "slid from
above" and landed on the survey station Phil was occupying an instant before.
(Kentucky Caver, Bluegrass Grotto, 2-86).
Bc Sloan's Valley System; Garbage Pit, Kentucky
1-86
Four cavers were traversing from Garbage Pit to the Post Office entrance of the
Sloan's Valley System in Pulaski County. They were at the south overlook to the Big
Room and used a fixed rope as a handline for a climb. One out of condition
individual failed to keep his hold on the rope and fell; he stopped at the edge of a
dropoff, avoiding a further 40 foot fall. He was helped up the rope and continued
the trip. One caver commented on "How many times we take nerds and push them
to the limit and get by with the attitude of 'he is out of shape and I want to see him
sweat. (The Cave Cricket Gazette, Miami Valley Grotto, 11(3), 4-86).
Dr Boundary Pit, Kentucky
1-86
On a trip to this newly opened pit, three cavers experienced rock fall incidents.
The upper part of the 105 foot descent is in the crumbly Roubidoux formation. One
caver was struck on the foot by a small, ricochetting rock and another was narrowly
missed by a larger one. (Mick Sutton, MSS Liaison 26(5), 5-86, p 33).
Cc Santa Claus (Pearl) Cave, California
1-86
A group traversed the cave to the Register Room. At the "last optional climb"
before exiting a caver was demonstrating chimneying, fell and suffered a bad ankle
sprain. He was assisted out and taken to a hospital. He had also fractured a toe
bone. (Short Rounds, Golden Gate Grotto, 2-86, p 10).
BI Crevice Cave, Missouri
1-3-86
A group of university students started on a through trip in Crevice Cave but
became confused, turned back, then couldn't retrace their path in. They became
overdue and were found by cavers about 1200 feet in from the entrance. (MSS
Liaison 26(2), 2-86, p 10).
Dcs Parker's Pit Cave, Indiana
1-25-86
Four cavers were in Parker's Pit. At the Upper Bound, a 22 foot pit, two had
descended when the third came down with a "whoosh," crashing to the floor. He
was using a carabiner-brake bar device and had neglected to completely rig in -
the rope went through a biner, over the bar, but not back down through the biner!
The caver was not injured and continued. On the same trip a caver became stuck in
the Z-Bend and had to be helped through by cavers ahead and behind. (S. J.
Collins, CIG Newsletter, April 1986, 74-77).
394 NSS News: November 1987
Dc Breathing Cave, Virginia
1-18-86
In the Nutcracker, a short but constricted drop, a caver fell, landing on his back
on a small knob on the floor. He was in pain but not injured and continued. Later,
while leaving the Natural Bridge Room, a second caver fell down a steep clay bank,
landing on his back, suffering great pain but no injury, from a flashlight in his back
pocket. (Dead Dog Dispatch, Tri State Grotto, 1(2), Jan. 1986).
Dr Fisher Ridge System, Kentucky
1-86
In January two cavers were in the Fisher Ridge System via the Remington Sink
Entrance. They did a long survey trip in Midway Canyon then headed out. At the
bottom of the Remington Room they were getting their vertical gear on when there
was a large rockfall from the other side of the room. They were inspired to haste.
The first got up without incident, but as the second started up another, larger
rockfall occurred. He was not hit and they continued out. The collapse had occurred
in an area they had passed through only moments before. Apparently this area is
affected by freeze and thaw and these cavers recommend it be avoided. (Dan
Crowl, "Fisher Ridge Summary" DUG Scoops, 2-86, 5).
BI Bowden Cave, West Virginia
2-16-86
1 p.m. on Sunday, February 16, a group of seven young men (early 20's) from
Barbour County entered Bowden Cave in Randolph County, West Virginia. They
split up and explored; later only a group of three was able to find its way out. At 11
p.m. Sunday, the Elkins Volunteer Fire Department was notified. Six of them
entered the cave and found the lost cavers at about 1 a.m., on the opposite side of
the water passage - they had lights and were in good condition but had been
unable to locate the water passage and had sat down to wait for help. (George
Dasher "Rockin' Chair", West Virginia Caver 4(2), 4-86; Bob Liebman, Personal
Communication, 2-27-86).
Dcd Sumidero of the Rio Atima, Santa Barbara, Honduras
March 1986
On a push trip into the Rio Atima Sumidero, Steve Knutson was not far in from
the entrance when he slipped on the slimy, water-sprayed rock and severely twisted
his left ankle. He decided to continue the trip, getting out 17 hours later. The ankle
was swollen, discolored and sore. Hot water baths and exercise were taken the
following day. Four days later he went on another push trip and continued caving
for the rest of the expedition, taping the ankle for each trip. The ankle later
produced bone spurs but has recovered. On another push trip, Jon Burkig nearly
drowned when caught in turbulence while trying to cross a waterfall plunge pool.
(Steve Knutson, Personal Communication, March 1986).
Da Lee Cave, Kentucky
3-29-86
A group was pushing the main drain in the Thorsell Shafts area of Lee Cave when
Tom Alfred experienced a carbide explosion that burned has nose and singed his
eyebrows and moustache. He was using a ziplock bag with the spent carbide sealed
inside and opened it next to his face while his carbide lamp was still lit. (Tom Alfred
"Expedition Report, March 28-31, 1986," CRF Newsletter, 5-86, p 2).
Ar Moonshine Cave, Kentucky
3-29-86
In Mammoth Cave National Park ridgewalking produced the entrance to
Moonshine Cave, small but with good air movement. In moving breakdown Rick
Olsen "Smashed two fingers on his left hand." (Tom Alfred "Expedition Report,
March 28-31, 1986," CRF Newsletter, 5-86, 2).
BI Buckner's Cave, Indiana
5-86
At 1:30 p.m. on Saturday, two cavers entered Buckner's Cave near Bloomington,
Indiana. They explored for a while, then became confused as to the way out. When
their lights began to grow dim, they sat down to wait for rescue in the King's
Grotto.
Roommates and friends became increasingly worried and on Sunday local cavers
went in to find the victims. At noon fourteen entered and searched for some time.
Four novices meanwhile entered and, with beginner's luck, found the lost pair. The
victims ate some candy and exited under their own power. (Scott Fee, "The Great
May Grotto Trip Rescue" CIG Newsletter, 6-86, p 109).
Be Fulford Cave, Colorado
5-17-86
Two youngsters entered Fulford Cave in Colorado via a rope hand-line down the
30 foot entrance drop. After exploring, one was unable to climb out. The other went
for help; he returned with a local rancher who pulled the trapped boy up. He was
shivering from cold and "could only babble his name." (Rick Rhinehart, Rocky Mtn
Caving 3(3), Summer 1986, p 27).

---------- Page 11 ----------
Dr Brussels Hill Pit Cave, Wisconsin
6-22-86
On June 22 cavers were digging in this 30 foot pit, hauling debris up in a bucket.
At one point a "huge rock" fell back down but missed Kevin Hennings who was
digging at the time. (Norbert Kox, Wisconsin Caver, 7-86, p 16).
Dr Summer's End, Colorado
7-7-86
On July 7 a group of four was in Summer's End Cave in Colorado. One was
climbing down a breakdown slope and dislodged a rock; this bounded down and hit
Devin Jones (17) in the face. Fortunately it was a glancing blow and he suffered
only abrasion to his cheek and nose. Laura Jones observed, 'Keep your head down
and stay away from the bottom while others are descending.' This goes for vertical
caving as well; never look up - let your helmet do its job. (Laura Jones, NSS
Accident Report, undated).
De Gargantua Cave, British Columbia, Canada
7-13-86
On the way out of Gargantua Cave from the 818 foot level, a caver had done one
of the two vertical pitches when he noticed "some loose stitches" on his foot Gibbs
harness. He continued. Halfway up the 56 foot pitch the primary stitching gave way
but the "backup" stitching held. (Keith Wheeland, Nittany Grotto News 33(4),
8-86, p 22-23).
Be Breathing Cave, Virginia
7-19-86
On Saturday, July 19, Mary Hagerty (29) and Charlie Duffy (30) entered
Breathing Cave in Bath County, Virginia. They intended to see the waterfall but
were ill-equipped; one had only a flashlight and the other a single helmet-mounted
electric light. They were dressed in ordinary clothes and tennis shoes. Fortunately
they encountered other cavers. Later that night when they were obviously overdue,
the other cavers organized a search and with the help of some BCCS cavers, found
the two about 4 a.m. sitting in the dark in the Ignition Room. (John Rosenfeld,
"Breathing Cave" BCCS Newsletter, 1986).
Cc Fulford Cave, Colorado
Summer 1986
"While doing some preliminary work for the upcoming Cave Rescue Seminar,
Greg Miller slipped and fell in the Attic of Fulford Cave, dislocating his shoulder.'
[Steve Reames, Rocky Mtn Caving, Summer 1986).
Dbe Knox Cave, New York
7-26-86
A group of seven cavers was visiting Knox Cave in New York State on July 26.
The group had toured the cave and was headed out. The Gunbarrel is a 50 foot long
tube 14 inches in diameter near the entrance. Roland Vineyard started through,
shoving his pack ahead of him, followed by two others. At a tighter place, halfway
through, he suddenly noticed smoke coming towards him. It was extremely acrid,
burning his lungs and eyes. He yelled ahead that his pack was on fire and that he
was retreating. He did so, moving as fast as possible, afraid that he might be
overcome by the fumes.
The three waited 45 minutes, then exited. They found that a "Nite Lite" battery
in his pack had shorted, burning the insulation off and nearly melting through the
side of the battery. Only "severe headaches and sore throats resulted.' They
strongly suggest a fuse in electric systems. (Roland Vineyard, Personal
Communication, undated; also in Northeastern Caver 17(4); Clayton Pauley,
Northeastern Caver 17(4), p 100).
Da Brokedown Palace Cave, California
Summer 1986
On a survey trip to Brokedown Palace Cave, three cavers were in a bellycrawl
tube when there was a tremendous explosion from the second in line, Jim Wolff.
Wolff started moaning since his pack had suffered a carbide explosion right in his
face. His face was blackened and his eyes sore from the flame and soot, but he was
OK. The pack, a Lost Creek model, was literally destroyed, with the quick release
buckles snapped off and the seams all ripped out. Wolff's equipment was stuffed
into other packs and they departed. (Jim Wolff, Personal Communication,
undated).
Cc Sloan's Valley System, Kentucky
8-15-86
On August 15 a group entered the Sloan's Valley System in Kentucky, via Post
Office Pit to explore the Appalachian Trail and exit Screamin' Willy's Entrance.
After a considerable time in the cave, they arrived at the exit. To reach the
bottom of the 54 foot exit pit, which had already been rigged with a cable ladder,
one had to climb into a small hole about ten feet above the passage floor. Mark
Guttadauro tried this and fell, badly bruising one leg. He was now unable to do the
climb. Remarkably, he found a previously unknown crawlway that bypassed this
pitch. A belay was set up at the 54 foot ladder climb. The victim made it out despite
a couple of slips and numerous rest stops. (Mark Suer, "Sloan's Surprise," The
Electric Caver, Greater Cincinnati Grotto, 1-87, p 4-6).
DI Johnson's Cave, Tennessee
8-15-86
At about 11:30 a.m. Friday, August 15, three persons entered Johnson's Cave
near Highway 84 and the Putnam-White County line in Tennessee. One of the
group, Norman Schall, Jr. (22) went ahead of the other two, intending to wait and
'surprise" them. The surprise was his when the other two went a different way.
The other two found their way out and, at about 1:30 a.m., notified the Monterey
Rescue Squad. The cave has a 40 foot drop which has been the scene of several
previous accidents so the rescue crews arrived at about 2:45 a.m. with vertical
equipment. The victim emerged at the same time, having finally found his way.
Surprise! (Marion Moore, "Caver Exits Unharmed," Herald-Citizen, Cookeville,
Tennessee, 8-17-86, p 1-2)
Br Stompbottom Cave, Virginia
8-23-86
On Saturday, August 23, three cavers went surveying beyond the Gnarly Hole in
Stompbottom Cave in Tazewell County, Virginia. At around 5 p.m., Koichiro
Takamizawa was climbing a breakdown pile to check a lead when a large rock
slipped a few inches, trapping both of his feet.
After a half hour of work, his companions had freed one foot. At 7 p.m. one
companion went for help. CRCN waas reached and had rescuers at the cave early
Sunday morning. The victim and companion stayed warm with garbage bags and
carbide lamps.
At 3:30 a.m. the victim had freed himself by digging in the ground beneath his
ankle. They proceeded to a point 100 feet from the Gnarly Hole and waited for a
splint to be brought through the tight crawls. Due to miscommunications and
inability of the rescuers to fit through the tight places, a splint never arrived. At
6:30 a.m. they started out, arriving at the entrance at 9 a.m. (Joan Johnson,
Koichiro Takamizawa "Stompbottom Accident Report" Tech Troglodyte (VPI
Grotto) Spring 1987).
Bs Goose Creek (Lost Creek) Cave, Colorado
10-3-86
On a through trip of the Lost Creek Cave System, Steve Sims was swimming a
canal while the others traversed the walls to either side. At a narrow place a foot
became wedged underwater between the walls. His friends couldn't climb down to
help him, so one climbed into an alcove with a rope and fed the trapped caver one
end of it. Sims tied it around himself under his arms but still couldn't pry himself
loose. His leg became painful so he pivoted to relieve it and suddenly was free.
(Todd Warren, Rocky Mtn Caving, Winter 1987, p 24). Note that this is the cave in
which Bruce Unger died in 1980 when his foot became wedged in a fast chute.
Flowing water is a powerful agent and must be respected.
Dr Lazy Day Cave, British Columbia, Canada
10-86
In October of 1986 a group of cavers was in Lazy Day Cave on Vancouver Island in
British Columbia, Canada. They were crawling through a virgin fissure two and a
half feet wide with a cobblestone floor when the floor suddenly gave way. Those
involved immediately jammed themselves across the passage, saving themselves
from a 15 foot fall. In virgin cave I guess one should expect anything. (Ed.
"Disaster of the Month," SFBC Newsletter, 11-86, p 4).
Be Johnson's Crook Cave, Georgia
10-25-86
On Saturday October 25, three people (two males and a female, early 20's) went
caving in Johnson's Crook Cave in Dade County, Georgia. To negotiate the 20 foot
entrance drop they used a non-nylon rope with knots tied at intervals. The first
descended hand-over-hand; the female was then lowered on the end of the rope.
When the third started down hand-over-hand, the rope broke and he fell onto the
first man; together they rolled down the slope. Neither was seriously injured. They
had no helmets and two were wearing only shorts and shirts. Luckily some "real"
cavers had entered before them and at 4:30 p.m. they returned to the entrance
room and helped the victims out. (Steve Storey and Brian Williamson, "Accident
Report," Unpublished, 12-15-86, 2 pp.).
Cc Hell Creek Cave, Arkansas
October 1986
A group of cavers were in Hell Creek Cave in Arkansas. At the water passage
they got very wet and cold. To regain some warmth they took off for the entrance.
At the "Don't Slip Crevice" Tim Shaw tripped and fell jamming for a moment
across the ledges before falling into the mud and water ten feet below. He badly
bruised the upper left side of his body and left shoulder but was able to continue.
(Tim Shaw, "Hell Creek" Hodag Headlines, Hendrix Student Grotto, 10-86, p2).

---------- Page 12 ----------
Be Shaft Cave, Indiana
11-3-86,1
Late on the night of November 3, three people rappelled into Shaft Cave near
Bloomington, Indiana. They had no real ascending gear but one made a makeshift
rig using knots. He got out and called the State Police for help. They called cavers
who retrieved the remaining two. The gate had been vandalized only the week
before, allowing this nerd entrapment. [Dave Haun, "More on Shaft Cave,"
Indiana Karst Conservancy Update, 11-86, p 17).
Ac Dames Cave, Florida
11-7-86
On November 7 several people were at a Crystal River tavern drinking and
dancing when they got the bright idea to go caving. They drove to Dames Cave in
Withlacoochee State Forest. Colleen Costello (26) was looking down into one pit,
where there was something burning; she took two steps backward and fell into a
second pit. She dropped some 20 to 25 feet, fracturing her pelvis and wrist. She was
taken to Citrus Memorial Hospital. (Ed. "Cave Explorer takes a fall," St.
Petersburg Times, 11-11-86; in Tampa Bay Caver 4(6), 12-86)
Ac Moler's Cave, West Virginia
11-15-86
At 11 a.m. on Saturday, November 15, a group from YMCA Horizons Youth
Service entered Moler's Cave in the West Virginia panhandle. They were
apparently novices paying for a cave trip. The group proceeded to the back of the
cave. At 2:30 p.m. a 13 year old girl slipped, fell and dislocated her knee. The
leaders sent word out to the caretakers at the farmhouse to call for help. Jefferson
County Emergency Services was called and two Fire Companies responded. NCRC
was also contacted as well as D.C. area grottoes.
The cave has tight places that keeps a Stokes litter from being taken into the
lower levels. Meanwhile the knee was relocated and after being given medication
the girl was able to walk. She was thus escorted to the litter but it was then decided
to put her in a seat harness and haul her up that way. She was out of the cave by 9
p.m. (Jay Sperry, "Rescue at Moler's Cave," Dead Dog Dispatch, Tri State Grotto,
1(12), 12-86, p 304-305).
Dr Sloan's Valley Cave, Kentucky
11-15-86
At a potential entrance called Doug's Dig, Doug Stecko was checking things after
a flood. The sink was enlarged and the lead at the bottom more open. He climbed
down to check more closely when two two-ton boulders came loose beneath him; he
was not injured as he and the boulders rolled to the bottom. He carefully climbed
out. (Doug Stecko, "Sloan's Valley Cave, Doug's Dig," Cave Cricket Gazette,
Miami Valley Grotto, 12(2), 3-87).
Cc Scott Hollow Cave, West Virginia
11-22-86
On November 22, three cavers were in Scott Hollow Cave in Monroe County,
West Virginia, surveying. One took a short fall, caught himself with his left hand
and dislocated his shoulder. His companions went for help and initiated a rescue
call-out. There was a mile of cave and two vertical drops between the victim and the
entrance. But, "not having much else to do," he started out, exiting just before
midnight. (George Dasher, "The Rockin' Chair," The West Virginia Caver, 5(1),
2-87, p 12).
Cr Scott Hollow Cave, West Virginia
12-6-86
On December 6 a group of six entered Scott Hollow Cave in Monroe County,
West Virginia. They split into two groups, one to push ahead and survey and the
other to follow, surveying. The survey reached the top of a 25 foot pit with a
continuation at the bottom. As Rusty Wilson stepped to the floor after descending,
a rock fell striking him on the shin. He suffered a deep puncture wound with
bleeding. A dressing, Ace bandage, and black electrical tape were applied and he
was given two aspirin. They exited with further incident. (Gary Ferrell, "Accident
Report: Scott Hollow Cave," Parkersburg Subterranean Flyer 4(3), 3-86).
Be Howard's Waterfall Cave, Georgia
12-15-86
On December 15 a mixed group of novice and experienced cavers visited
Howard's Waterfall Cave in Northwest Georgia. They entered in mid-afternoon and
toured the cave, but didn't do the rope drop into the "canyon" because one of the
new cavers was getting tired.
396 NSS News: November 1987
Meanwhile, three boys (early teens) saw the car at the entrance and became
inspired. With one weak flashlight they entered and proceeded, unknowing, in the
direction of the register. When the flashlight started to fail, they panicked and ran
for the entrance, "slamming into formations and barely missing pits.' At this point
they encountered the other party, who escorted them to the entrance. They had
suffered some bruises and abrasions but were OK. This may seem like a very minor
incident but it was pure chance that the experienced group came by when they did.
(Dan Hills, Personal Communication 5-27-87).
Do Wayne's Cave, Indiana
12-27-86
On Saturday, December 27 at 9:30 a.m. a group of cavers entered Wayne's Cave
in Indiana. This was an Explorer Scout group with three adult leaders, ten in all.
They had obtained permission and a key to the gate from the Indiana Karst
Conservancy. While they were in the cave (about eight fairly strenuous hours)
someone jammed the lock. Rubber cement had been applied and an X-acto knife
jammed in and broken off. When they tried to exit, they could not open the gate.
Most were sent back to a drier part of the cave while two leaders worked on the
lock and tried to signal some outsider with their lights. After four hours the lock was
opened. (Keith Dunlap, "Incident at Wayne's Cave," CIG Newsletter, Oct 1987, p
12; Gary Doolittle, "Incident at Wayne's Cave," Personal Communication
undated).
Da,c Rehoboth Church Cave, Virginia
12-28-86
On December 28 a group of four cavers was in Rehoboth Church Cave in Monroe
County, Virginia. They had entered at 11 p.m. to take photos and stayed long
enough for at least one carbide charge. As they came through a tight crawlway
there was an explosion. Acetylene escaping from the pack of Kenneth Anderson
(23) had ignited as he pushed the pack ahead of him. The explosion knocked off his
helmet but did no permanent damage. The acetylene was generated from the
moisture getting at loose carbide in the bottom of the pack - he had neglected to
properly close the lid of his carbide container. On the way out Jay Tompkins (20)
was traversing above a pool when he slipped from his holds - the "water belay"
saved him from injury. (Wayne Arrington, NSS Accident Report undated, 2 pp.).
Be Sotano De Apetzco, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
12-28-86
On December 28, four cavers were in Mexico doing Sotano de Apetzco. They
rigged a new rope on the 400 foot entrance pitch and rappelled in. Two were down
when Terry Bolger came in. At the point where it bells out, 250 feet above the floor,
he went out of control and had to be stopped by a bottom belay. They discovered
later that his rack was bent near the bottom, allowing the bottom two bars to pop off
when he moved the rope back and forth with his braking hand while negotiating the
non-free ledges and cracks. When he hit free-fall, he had only four bars working.
With the slick new rope this offered too little friction. One should try to wrap the
rope around their body and leg to gain more friction if something like this happens.
On the way out the last caver arrived at the rope pad to find that the rope had
slipped off it and the sawing up and down had worn off almost all of the sheath.
This can be sometimes avoided by consciously breaking your ascending rhythm so
that bouncing doesn't occur. (Mike Goar, "Sotano de Apetzco, Southwestern
Cavers, Jan-Feb 1987, p 18-19).
DIVING INCIDENTS 1986
AA Kihei Lava Cave, Hawaii
Winter
AA Morrison Springs, Florida
2-1
AA Peacock Springs, Florida
3-29
B
Fishrock Cave, Hawaii
Spring
AA Caye Caulker Caverns, Belize
6-2
AA Devil's Ear Spring, Florida
8-12
AA Morrison Spring, Florida
8-30
AA Royal Springs Cave, Florida
10-8
De Crab Creek Cave, Florida
Winter

---------- Page 13 ----------
AA Kihei Lava Cave, Hawaii
Winter 1986
In a second hand report, two divers were exploring lava tube caves in shallow
water near Kihei, Maui in the Hawaiian Islands. One signalled low on air and went
for the surface. When the partner (male, around 50) failed to follow, the diver at the
surface went for help. The body was recovered some hours later in the lava cave at a
depth of 25 feet. There was no air left in the tank. No guideline, no extra light, no
air rule and no survival. (Jeff Bozanic, "Maui Lava Tube Fatality," Underwater
Speleology, 13(4) p 6.
AA Morrison Springs, Florida
2-1-86
On Saturday, February 1, three young men camped at Morrison Spring, Ponce de
Leon, Florida, for some diving. In the early evening they did a dive and later, nearly
midnight, Todd DeLoach (25) and Joseph Treadwell (25) dove again. They had
single 72's, single valves and had a rental underwater flashlight each.
The next morning the diver who had gone to bed instead of diving, awoke to find
the others missing. Their bodies were found at 8:30 a.m., one at the 60 and one at
the 90 foot level.
References:
1) Editor, "Double Drowning at Morrison Spring," Underwater Speleology, 13(2),
2-24-86.
2) John Burge, "Follow-up report Morrison Spring Drowning," ibid, 13(3),
4-17-86,
3) Jennie Hess, "2 Georgia divers find death in Florida cave," The Atlanta
Journal/Constitution, 9-14-86, p 41A.
Analysis: Due to high river levels outside the spring, visibility in the spring was five
to ten feet; this extended down to 40 feet. At the mouth of the cave leading off,
visibility was good but even in daytime, no light penetrates here. It is again pointed
out by cave-qualified divers that all the "rules" were violated: no guide lines, no
redundancy of lights, no air management planning, no compass, no light at the
entrance, etc. But it must be said that these "rules" are really only known to
cave-certified divers. Perhaps signs listing these rules and posted at popular
springs in Florida would reduce the fatality rate somewhat.
AA Peacock Springs, Florida
3-29-86
On Saturday, March 29, a group of four entered Peacock Springs in Suwannee
County, Florida. Besides standard SCUBA gear they were equipped only with reef
gloves, snorkles, single dive light each and no guide line. On the scene were some
trained cave divers who offered advice, to no avail. The group had no cave diving
training and no knowledge of the cave. They began their dive; the cave divers kept
track of the situation.
Apparently [as reconstructed by cave divers doing the body recovery] the group
entered the traditional cavern area and explored for a while. Reaching the western
end they saw the orange warning sign and began to move toward the "slit" looking
for clear water for photography. There, two descended while photographing the
rest. One of these two, John Hodgson [31], apparently became bored and left the
group. It is speculated that he followed the main passage guideline as far as the
white warning sign. This led to poor visibility SO he started for the entrance. At the
east tunnel hes exited to get help. The cave divers were still there and began a
search almost immediately, while authorities were being alerted. At first they
geared up for a resuscitation but as time went by it became a body search. The
victim was found after some 25 minutes of searching.
Reference: Joe Prosser, 'Accident Report - Peacock Springs, Underwater
Speleology 13(3), 4-17-86, pp 5-6.
Analysis: The group ignored advice; they were told that training was required and
available. They believed they didn't need it since they weren't going in very far and
only a few times each year. Unfortunately, the victim couldn't resist the "urge to
explore" which has already killed many poorly prepared divers and will continue to
do so.
B Fishrock Cave, Hawaii Spring 1986 At p.m. a cave dive began involving
a
group of ten divers at Fishrock Cave in the Hawaiian Islands. At 2:06 they were at
the mouth of the deep entrance (there are two entrances) to the cave at a depth of 80
feet 4 meters). One diver, "Helen" (31) was certified only ten months before and
was apprehensive about the dive. It had been agreed between her and the
divemaster Neralyn Single that she might turn back at the cave entrance. She
signaled that she was OK. Her "eyes indicated no abnormal signs of stress."
Fifty feet into the cave they exchanged "OK" signals and Single started up the
Chimney, a 15 foot ascent in a narrow tube. At this point Helen began reacting
strangely; she remembered feeling that she was not moving at all, as if in a dream.
At 2:14, eight minutes into the dive, Single could see that "she was severely
stressed." She tried holding her close to comfort her, maintaining eye contact. She
was taking huge breaths and there was no longer a seal between her lips and the
regulator. She struggled, dislodging Single's regulator; her mask floated off and
her regulator fell from her mouth. Her eyes rolled up in her head and she arched
her back.
Single was able to get to Helen's regulator and get it in her mouth; she pried
Helen's fingers from it.
Another diver was now back at the top of the chimney, above them. This led to a
large horizontal passage and a shallow entrance, 240 feet away. The way behind
them was blocked by the main part of their party. So the diver above and Single got
Helen out the back, shallow entrance to the cave. As they did so, they could see
foam coming from the victim's lips and nostrils and in outside light they could see
that she was blue in the face. They estimate four to six minutes to get her to the
surface.
Helen had not been breathing for an estimated six minutes; her head was back,
jaw clenched. Single gave three quick breaths, mouth to nose, and the victim's jaw
relaxed. EAR was then given mouth to mouth. Another diver took over while one
went for the boat.
At 2:15 the boat arrived and Helen was taken aboard. She was given "cardiac
compression" initially but was found to have a very slow pulse so this was stopped;
she was placed in a "recovery position" and vomited copiously. She was badly
cyanosed, with dark blue lips, cheeks, ears and nose, so a regulator was connected
to an oxygen cylinder (Bendeez adaptor) and oxygen was administered. Since she
wouldn't accept the regulator in her mouth, she was commanded to "breathe in,'
then "breathe out" and the oxygen vented in her face on each inhalation. She
accepted the regulator in her mouth but would still only breathe on command.
The rest of the diving party arrived, two with their air depleted. The boat started
back, traveling slowly. The victim was still blue, with a very slow, weak pulse and
was vomiting and coughing fluid. She was given 25 minutes on pure oxygen, five
minutes off, then another twelve minutes.
At 3:24 the boat arrived at the beach and she was transferred by ambulance to a
hospital, being given more oxygen in route. She was now lucid, though still
appeared to be cyanosed, with pale skin, a pulse of 88. At 4:09 she arrived at the
hospital with a pulse of 75 and better color.
Reference: "Drowning and successful resuscitation at Fishrock Cave," Univ. of
Hawaii Report, in Underwater Speleology, 13(4), 6-25-86, p 4-5.
Analysis: According to the hospital report, this was a "remarkable survival" and
hinged on a number of coincidental factors:
1) Blood has an increased ability to carry oxygen under pressure. Thus at the time
of the incident, the victim had been deep, allowing her blood to have accepted much
more oxygen than if the dive had been reversed - going in the shallow entrance
first instead of the deep end.
2) The victim's companion and dive leader, Neralyn Single, rendered skillful and
determined aid in the form of five exhausting minutes of EAR, given when the
victim reached the surface, despite the "dead" appearance of the victim.
3) The boat was well-equipped with oxygen. During her trip to the hospital she was
given almost three hours of oxygen administration. They attribute to this the
avoidance of serious cerebral damage.
What caused this incident is not discussed. It may be some sort of seizure, or a
case of claustrophobia.
AA Caye Caulker Caverns, Belize
6-2-86
On Monday, June 2, a group of five set out to explore the great cave off the
leeward coast of Caye Caulker. The entrance is a 15 foot diameter pit with a couple
of constrictions that drops 80 feet into a huge room, 2200 feet long by 1800 feet wide
by 25 to 80 feet high. This is criss-crossed by dive lines from previous explorations.
Adolfo Ayuso [35] and Art Samuels [or Williams] entered first with the rest
turning back short of the room. Two went back in after a while and encountered
Samuels in the passage leading out but in a state of panic. When he became
unconscious they were able to bring him out. Attempts at resuscitation failed. The
other diver was never found.
References:
1) George Veni, "Concerning Caye Caulker Deaths," Underwater Speleology,
13(5), 9-15-86, 5.
2) "Caye Caulker Caverns claim two SCUBA Divers," Belize Reporter, 6-8-86 (in
Underwater Speleology, 13(5), p 5).
3) Frank Bounting, "Letter concerning double drowning in Belize," Underwater

---------- Page 14 ----------
Speleology 13(5), 9-15-86, p 6.
Analysis: Ayuso was described as a fine and very experienced diver. Veni
speculates that they may have become confused by the many dive lines in the room.
They had no line of their own, only single tanks without backup regulators or
octopus, and only every second person had a light. The letter from Frank Bounting
relates that Samuels' companions gave him CPR by putting his regulator (he had
500 psi still in his tank when he was brought in) in his mouth and pushing the
"purge" button. The divers were reported to have been drinking heavily earlier
that day.
AA Devil's Ear Spring, Florida


********** August 12, 1986
On August 12 three divers, Gary, Mike and Dennis Fuller, ages 29, 31, and 36,
were apparently attempting to dive the connection between the Ear and the Eye at
Ginnie Springs Caves in Florida. They had no cave dive training, no guide line, only
one tiny light each, and no air reserve plan. They apparently had made at least one
previous dive the same day on the same air fill. They failed to appear at the Eye, or
back at the Ear.
The bodies were found at separate points in the traverse, one just past the tight
restriction near the Eye, the second on the far side of the room past the restriction
and the third in the Devil's Dungeon. Two had 3 D-cell Dacor lights and the other a
micro Tekna light - all these were still burning. Silting had apparently obscured
their way.
References:
1) Editor "Triple Drowning at Devil's Eye," Underwater Speleology 13(5), 9-15-86,
p 4.
2) "Drownings haunt Florida's underwater caves," The Atlanta Journal and
Constitution, 8-24-86.
Analysis: They violated the "No Light" rule (as well as all cave diving rules) at the
Ginnie Springs Resort, forbidding cave diving, and were in fact caught with lights
by the caretaker; they had to wait until no one was present to make their fatal dive.
AA Morrison Spring, Florida
8-30-86
In the evening of August 30, a group of divers was at Morrison Spring in Walton
County, Florida. At about 7:15 p.m. several participated in a training night dive;
each had a single light and attached to each person's gear was a cyalume; two
colors identified student and instructor. At the end of this session, four decided to
do a dive into the lower cavern. No guideline was used; each had a single light,
single tank, and single cyalume.
After a short period in the lower cave, two indicated "low on air" to the other
two, and headed up. For a while they couldn't find the way, but surfaced safely.
The other two, Mike Clennan (36) and Brenda Beugnot (26) signalled, as the
other two left (8:40 p.m.), that they would stay a while. Clennan was PADI rescue
certified but had no cave training; Beugnot had been certified open water just that
day.
Clennan had started with 1200 psi, Beugnot with 1700, and they had agreed to
turn back at 500.
Other divers entered immediately after the two survivors surfaced. It had been
398 NSS News: November 1987
five to ten minutes since Clennan and Beugnot were last seen. Beugnot was found
against the ceiling and Clennan on the floor of the lower cavern. Both masks were
on; both regulators were out of their mouths. No lights were on. The cyalumes were
too dim to provide meaningful illumination. It was a dark night - the entrance
could not be seen.
Both were evacuated; at the surface they were given CPR until EMS arrived.
They were pronounced dead after arrival at a hospital.
Reference: John Burge, "Double Drowning at Morrison Spring," Underwater
Speleology, 13(5) 9-15-86, p 3.
Analysis: Burge says they only violated:
The light rule
The line rule
The air rule
The training rule
And good judgement.
AA Royal Springs Cave, Florida
10-8-86
At around 5 p.m. James E. Morgan, Jr. (28) entered Royal Springs Cave in
Suwannee County, Florida. He had no cave dive training. Two companions in open
water alerted authorities. A sign at the cave entrance warns against entry with cave
training. The cave has no flow and is extremely silty. Morgan became lost and
eventually ran out of air. It is speculated that he was within 15 feet of the entrance
when he first became lost. His body was found in 40 foot depth on Sunday morning.
Reference: George Petrena, "Man Drowns," Branford News, 10-9-86; in
Underwater Speleology, 13(6), p 4.
De Crab Creek Cave, Florida
Winter 1986
Two divers were exploring in a water-filled cave at Crab Creek on the
Chasshowitzka River in Florida late in 1986. They had reached their turnaround
point and were heading out. They were now experiencing zero visibility. They had
laid two lines in the course of two dives. As they headed out, they came to the end
of the first line, 50 feet from the entrance where it had been attached; ten feet of it
was "flapping in the current." Fortunately they could remember where they were
in the main room. The diver with a single tank attached his line to continue out
when the current caught the other (double sidemount tanks), breaking off the
outcrop he was holding. He was now separated from his companion, could not see
his light, and had no line, all in zero visibility. He did know the shape of the room
and so oriented himself to the flow of particulates in his limited view and proceeded
to the top of the room where he encountered, as expected, the end of the first
guideline. Both exited safely.
Reference: Stan Hankins, "How to Assume Yourself into a Statistic,' Underwater
Speleology, 14(2), 3-20-87, p 9.
Analysis: Hankins figures two major errors: 1) They assumed the guideline of their
first dive, a month before, would still be there and took a short cut to the end of that
dive penetration to start their second dive. 2) They did not account for the poor
visibility that should have been expected in exiting a tight, complex, silty virgin
cave. But neither panicked and both survived.

---------- Page 15 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Accident Report Form
Date of Accident:
Day of Week:
Cave:
State:
Reported by:
Name
Address
City
Name (s) of person (s)
Age
Sex
Experience
involved
Describe the accident as completely as possible on the back of this form or on a separate sheet. If possible obtain
information from those involved. Use additional sheets if necessary. A report in the style of "American Caving
Accidents" is ideal. The following checklist is suggested as a guide for information to be included:
(
) Events leading to accident. Location and conditions in cave.
The Accident
( ) Description of how it occurred.
( ) Nature of injuries sustained.
( ) Analysis of main cause.
(
) Contributory causes (physical condition of caver. weather. equipment. clothing.
etc.)
( ) What might have been done to prevent the accident.
Rescue
( ) Actions following accident.
( ) Persons contacted for help. A flowchart may be helpful.
( ) Details of rescue procedures.
Further details were reported in:
( ) Newspapers
( )
Grotto newsletter
( ) Other
(Please enclose ccpies if possible.)
Please return completed report to the NSS as
soon as possible after the accident.
Time:
State
Zip
Affiliation
Injuries or
Comments
National Speleological Society
Cave Avenue
Huntsville, Alabama 35810

---------- Page 16 ----------
Supplier of:
Helmets CMI
Tubular sling Tekna
Gibbs ascenders
Chargers
Racks and brakebars Carabiners
Premier Carbide Lamps
Jumars
Knee pads
PMI rope BW rope
Carbide
Canvas Grip
Tapes
Bruntons and Suuntos
Electric lights T-shirts and much more
write for price list to:
BOB & BOB, PO Box 441, Lewisburg, WV 24901, U.S.A.
BOB & BOB
"Cavers Serving Cavers
Worldwide"
