
---------- Page 1 ----------
NSS N EWS
American Caving
Accidents
2017-2018
December 2019

---------- Page 2 ----------
CALEND AR
USA
July 30-August 3, 2020-Rescue Technician:
Cave I/II course, Pro-Board Certified, NFPA 1006
December 28-31, 2019-Leave No Trace
Symposium at the NSS HQ in Huntsville. Contact
Taught by Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit. Location:
Union Grove, AL (near Huntsville). Cost to
Fennigan Spencer, NSSLeaveNoTrace2019@
caves.org or 929-260-0447 https://members.
Cavers: $90. ProBoard certification: $320 (in-
caves.org/event/LeaveNoTrace2019
state) / $540 (out-of-state)
December 31, 2019-January 1, 2020-Bat
More information: www.hcru.org/rescueclass
Ball New Year's Eve party at the NSS HQ in
June 28-July 2, 2021-NSS Convention in
Huntsville. Contact Fennigan Spencer, BatBall@
Weed, California! Nestled in a pine forest in
caves.org, (929) 260-0447. https://members.
extreme northern California, the 14,000-foot
caves.org/event/BatBall2019
Mount Shasta Volcano stands guard over the
May 18-22, 2020-Conservation of Fragile Karst
rugged City of Weed. Named after her founder,
Resources: A Workshop on Sustainability and
Abner Weed, this historic lumber town rests
Community", informally referred to as UNESCO
at the intersection of California's mountainous
Karst 2020. On the campus of Western Kentucky
limestone ridges and mysterious lava tubes.
University in Bowling Green, KY and hosted
Hundreds of caves in the nearby hills can provide
by WKU, the George Wright Society, and the
challenges for a lifetime of explorers. We hope
Mammoth Cave Area Biosphere Reserve. For
you can join us for the 2021 NSS Convention in
additional information please visit our website
Weed, CA. http://nss2021.caves.org/
https://unescokarst2020.com/.
June 12th-20th, 2020-National Cave Rescue
Commission Cave Rescue Operations
and Management Seminar: Camp Pinnacle,
Voorheesville, NY. Register at: https://ncrc.
regfox.com/ncrc-2020-national-seminar or
https://bit.ly/2k6hPl3
July 27-July 31, 2020-NSS Convention
in Elkins, WV. https://caves.regfox.com/nss-
convention-2020
Send items for the calendar to davebunnell@
comcast.net at least 4 weeks before desired month of
publication (e.g., by April 1 for the May issue).
SPELEO
PROJECTS
Caving & Mountain Edition
Caving Publications International. serving cavers for over 30 years
2020 F
CAVING CAL
CALENDRIER SPELÉOLOGIQUE
HÖHLEN
CALENDARIO DE ESPELEOLOGÍA
CALENDARIO
Speleo Projects Caving Calendar 2020
Twelve monthly pages featuring a selection of caves of
the United States, United Kingdom, Spain, Bahamas,
Italy, Slovenia, France, Kyrgyzstan and New Zealand.
Size: 113/4"x171/4"
American Caving Accidents
2017-2018
American Caving Accidents
Editor
Bonny Armstrong
110 Timber Lakes Estates
Heber City, Utah
aca@caves.org
American Caving Accidents
Review Committee:
Andy Armstrong
Richard Breisch
George Dasher
Yvonne Droms
Mark Minton
Stephen Mosberg
Rene Ohms
Sarah Richards
Christian Stenner
Forrest Wilson
Webmaster: Brian Dickey
Orders:
National Speleological Society, Inc.
6001 Pulaski Pike
Huntsville, AL 35810 - 1122
Tel.: (256) 852-1300 Fax: (256) 851-9241
E-mail: bookstore@caves.org
Secure online ordering: http://nssbookstore.org
Credit cards accepted: Mastercard, Visa, Discover,
American Express
Speleo Projects Publications:
HOWARD M. BECK
Alpine Caving
Techniques
Beneath
the
Cloud Forests
Alpine Caving Techniques
Beneath the Cloud Forests
A Complete Guide to Safe and Efficient
A History of Cave Exploration in Papua
Caving. By George Marbach and Bernard
New Guinea. By Howard M. Beck, 2003.
Tourte, 2002.
352 pages with maps, numerous B&W
320 pages, photos and 394 illustrations.
photos and 64 color pages.
Format: 8 1/4" 11 4/5", hardbound.
Format: 8 1/4' X 114/5", hardbound.
ISBN: 978-3-908495-10-9
ISBN: 978-3-908495-11-6

---------- Page 3 ----------
POSTMASTERS OR MEMBERS:
Send address changes to the National Speleological
SPELEOLOGICAL
Society Office, contact information below.
National Speleological Society Office
6001 Pulaski Pike NW, Huntsville, AL 35810
SWS
Tel: (256) 852-1300
e-mail:-nss@caves.org; Web te:http://caves.org/
Please contact the office for address changes or back issues.
NSS EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
President
FEATURE ARTICLES
Geary Schindel
Bexar Grotto
San Antonio, TX
president@caves.org
(210).326.1576 cell
American Caving Accidents 2017-2018
Operations VP
Administrative VP
Mark Skove
Katherine L. Crispin, Ph.D.
Smoky Mountain Grotto
Editor's Note
TRA Grotto, GAG, BATS
Clinton, TN
State College, Pennsylvania
Bonny Armstrong
(865) 640-2323
(610) 504-0339 cell
ovp@caves.org
avp@caves.org
Description of Incident Results and Types
Executive VP
Secretary/Treasurer
Scott Engel
Gaylene Speaect
2017 & 2018 Incident Maps
Smoky Mountain Grotto
Colorado Grotto
Knoxville, TN
Aurora, Colorado
(225) 281-3914
(303) 880 3168
Caving Accident and Incident Statistics 1967-2018
evp@caves.org
s-t@caves.org
2017-2018 List of Reported Accidents and Incidents
Dave Bunnell, Ph.D.
Box 879
2017 Caving Accidents and Incidents
Angels Camp, CA 95222
inssnews@caves.org
2017 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Please include "NSS News" in your subject line when e-mailing
material to help me sort it from the spam. Thanks!
2017 Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Questions about submitting features and photos? Please see the style
and submission guidelines:on the NSS web site:
Steve Hudson Award
https://caves.org/pub/nssnews/style.shtm
ADVERTISING
2018 Caving Accidents and Incidents
Complete advertising information, including rate cards, mechanical
specs and deadlines is available online at
2018 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
https://caves.org/pub/nssnews/ads.shtml
New advertisers should contact Matt Bowers, NSS Director of
Business Development at 209-529-9000 or matt.bowers@caves.org.
2018 Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Payments for ads should be sent to the NSS office. New
advertisers are expected to pay for ads prior to publication.
Creating a Safe and Educational Environment for Vertical-training
DEPARTMENT EDITORS
Practice
ASSISTANT COPY EDITOR
UNDERGROUND ONLINE
Kurt Waldron and Bonny Armstrong
Gary Gibula
vacant
garygibula@aol.com
NEWSLETTER REVIEW
CONSERVATION
lan Reuter
Jim & Val Hildreth-Werker
5560 Sierra Court
PO Box 207
Rapid City, SD 57702
Hillsboro, NM 88042-0207
ianreuter@aol.com
895-5050
DEPARTMENTS
werks@cunacueva.com
CAVE CHRONICLES
Philip Rykwalder
Salon Images
SPELEAN SPOTLIGHT
phillip@cavenow.com
Gary Gibula
Society News
garygibula@aol.com
Cave Chronicles
Underground Update
Deadline: Ads, articles, and announcements should be sent to the
editor by the 1st of the month, 1 month before the month of issue (e.g.,
material for the March issue needs to be in by Feb. 1).
The NSS News (ISSN 0027-7010) is published monthly with
the Members Manual and American Caving Accidents published as
ABOUT HT COVER
additional issues by the National Speleological Society, Inc, 6001
Pulaski Pike NW, Huntsville, AL 35810. Periodicals Postage Paid at
Huntsville, Al and additional mailing offices. Tel: (256)852-1300, e-mail:
nss@caves.org, web: http://caves.org/
Two Austin firefighters raising a patient in an NCRC regional training seminar in
Regular membership with electronic copy of NSS News in the
NSS is $40 per year. Members may elect to receive paper copy
Texas. Photo by Rhonda Wright.
of NSS NEWS for $10 per year. Please visit members.caves.org
for descriptions of other membership categories. Non member
Subscriptions to the NSS News are $36 per year. Individual copies
are $3.00 each or 5 or more copies for $1.00 each. Contact the
Huntsville office for membership applications, subscriptions, orders,
Right: Mock rescue patient Rodney Mulder gives a smile as he starts moving in a
or
for replacement of issues missing or damaged in the mail. Moving?
Ferno-Washington litter towards the cave entrance during an Orientation to Cave
Address changes can be made from your profile in the Account
Rescue held near Oak City, Utah. Photo by Gretchen Baker.
Settings tab- Profile tab, for assistance call the office.
Left: Pulling a "patient" through a low spot in a mock rescue. Photo by Carrey Bull.
Copyright ©2019 by the National Speleological Society
Bottom: During the mock rescue in Rat's Nest Cave (Canmore, Alberta) for a
MIX
SPAR, the student had to figure out how to transition patient Becca Stubbs from the
Paper from
responsible sources
traveling haul across the bolts to the next section of rope. Photo by Gretchen Baker.
FSC
FSC C013672
December 2019
Volume 77 Number 12
22, 38
President's Message
News and Notes
Classified Ads
Front cover:
Back cover:

---------- Page 4 ----------
Editor's Note
To report, or not to report, that is the question. At
least, that's the question cavers ask me all the time.
When cavers learn that I am the editor of American
Caving Accidents, a typical response is, "Oh, you collect ac-
cident reports? Did you ever hear about my incident in XYZ
Cave?" To which my response is usually, "No. Did you sub-
mit a report to ACA?"
As the editor of American Caving Accidents (ACA)
for the past nine years, I have struggled to understand why
SO many cavers are happy to tell me their accident stories in
person at the NSS Convention or at a cave-rescue seminar,
but getting them to submit a report to ACA is more difficult
than opening a tweaked D-ring. From the resulting conver-
sations, I believe that the most common reasons why cavers
do not submit incident reports are: they aren't sure if their
incident would "qualify", they are intimidated to write
a report for publication or do not have the time, they are
embarrassed or concerned about bad publicity for a caver,
cave, or landowner; or they thought somebody else would
submit the report. In an effort to encourage more reporting
of incidents, I will address those concerns here.
What qualifies as a caving accident or incident? If you
are wondering if an incident should be reported, it prob-
ably should. American Caving Accidents is more than just the
journal of record for caving accidents in North America.
ACA is, first and foremost, a learning tool. Therefore, inci-
dents involving close calls, equipment problems, and self-
rescues can provide lessons as valuable as those from major
accidents. In other words, if something happened during
a caving trip that generated thought or discussion about
safety, it is worthy of sharing with the caving community.
There also seems to be confusion regarding wheth-
er a report should be submitted based on the location of the
incident. ACA reports accidents from anywhere in North
America including Canada, Mexico, Central America, and
the Caribbean. Territories of the United States, such as
Guam, are also included.
What if I don't have the time to write a detailed incident
report or I am just not good at writing reports? Writing a report
for the caving community to read can be intimidating (be-
lieve me, I know). The easiest way to submit a report is to
use the online incident report form at http://caves.org/pub/
aca. The form prompts you to fill in the pertinent details
needed for an interesting and informative report. From that
information, the ACA committee then writes the report that
will appear in print. The reporting party is usually contact-
ed to clarify information and fact check the ACA summary.
Does it still sound like too much work? ACA also
accepts reports by e-mail or phone interviews. You can con-
tact the editor by email, aca@caves.org, or find my personal
contact information in the NSS Members Manual.
I don't want to be embarrassed or embarrass anyone else.
This is understandable. The good news is, ACA will honor
anonymity requests. As you read this issue, you will see
numerous reports with no caver names mentioned. Cave
names can be withheld as well, which is why some loca-
tions are listed as "unspecified cave." It is never the inten-
tion of ACA to embarrass anyone. I hope that as you read
ACA Editor Bonny Armstrong. Photo by Andy Armstrong.
through the 2017 and 2018 accident reports, that this effort
is apparent.
I didn't submit a report because I thought someone else
would. If you were involved in an incident, either as a pa-
tient, team member, or rescuer, your perspective is valu-
able. The most interesting reports are those that are written
from multiple accounts. Even if you don't have firsthand
knowledge of an incident, please notify the ACA committee
SO that we can contact people who were involved.
Overcoming these misconceptions is the first step
to better incident reporting. Thank you everyone who sub-
mitted a report, and especially those who submitted mul-
tiple reports. Your stories make us think, help us learn, and
encourage us to become safer cavers.
Bonny Armstrong
NSS 43003
Heber City, UT

---------- Page 5 ----------
Description of Incident Results and Types
American Caving Accidents (ACA) is a special pub-
lication of the National Speleological Society (NSS). Since
1967, ACA has served as the journal of record for caving
accidents in North America. The purpose of collecting and
reporting caving accidents and incidents is to help cavers
educate themselves on the hazards of caving based on real-
life incidents. These incidents, when reported accurately
and in detail, should ultimately help readers become safer
cavers by learning through others' experiences.
Reports are collected through submissions by cav-
ers involved in the incident or rescue or by those who oth-
erwise have some credible knowledge of the event. Caving
incidents brought to the attention of ACA by media reports
are verified for accuracy by contacting involved parties di-
rectly when possible.
As with previous issues, caving reports have been
divided into two categories: regular caving and cave div-
ing. These categories are further classified by incident result
or outcome, and incident type (causes and contributing fac-
tors).
Some reported incidents are placed in a separate
category called "caving-related." These include incidents
in which a person needed rescuing from a cave that they
did not intend to enter, incidents that occur on the way to
or from a cave, incidents involving animals needing rescue
from a cave, or other unusual circumstances. Because these
incidents did not occur during normal caving activities but
required caving gear, cave-rescue techniques, or cavers to
effect a rescue, they are considered caving-related. Caving-
related incidents are not included in the statistics.
Description of Incident Results
Fatalities-Fatalities from caving are relatively uncommon
and average about three per year. Although fatalities tend
to occur with inexperienced, ill-equipped persons, experi-
enced cavers are not exempt.
Injury vs. No Injury-An injury is physical damage or harm
inflicted on a person, usually by an external force. Exam-
ples include wounds, fractures, contusions, burns, smoke
inhalation, and frostbite. Heart trouble, allergic reactions,
migraines, and other conditions are not considered injuries
and are categorized as a medical issue incident type.
Aid vs. No Aid-For the purposes of this publication, aid is
considered rendered in the following cases: if one or more
persons needed the help of others outside of those in their
caving party to exit the cave, if outside or additional assis-
tance was requested (even if not used), or if an ambulance
or Life Flight was used to transport the patient to a medical
facility.
Description of Incident Types
Acetylene-related-Acetylene-related incidents were more
common in the 1960s and 1970s than during the last few
decades. No acetylene-related incidents have been reported
since 1996, probably because bright yet relatively inexpen-
sive LED lights are now favored among the majority of
American cavers.
Bad Air-The presence of bad air in caves can be caused by
biological decomposition, poor air exchange, carbon mon-
oxide from fires, blasting fumes, or chemicals being washed
into the cave.
Caver Fall-Caver falls continue to constitute a large pro-
portion of caving accidents. For simplicity, any fall by any
person in a cave, regardless of their experience, is consid-
ered a caver fall.
Difficulty on Rope or Ladder-The category of difficulty on
rope or ladder was added to ACA in 1994 to encompass a
variety of problems that may prevent a caver from being
able to ascend or descend a rope or ladder.
Drowning-Drowning is often listed as the cause of cave
diving fatalities since the triggering event is often difficult
to identify. In non-scuba incidents, drowning may occur
from attempting to freedive into an underwater cave, swim-
ming in underground lakes or rivers, or being swept away
by water.
Equipment Problem-This catch-all category includes prob-
lems such as rigging, light, and rope failures; and misuse or
lack of equipment.
Exhaustion-Exhaustion is likely a contributing factor to
many caving accidents and is probably underrepresented
in caving accident statistics.
Flooding-Unexpected, rising water can lead to long-term
entrapment underground, hypothermia, and possibly
drowning. A good understanding of cave hydrology and
the local weather forecast are necessary skills for safe cav-
ing.
Hypothermia-Hypothermia is often a secondary result in
caving incidents resulting from a caver being stuck, injured,
or stranded in a cave. Hypothermia is especially dangerous
not only because of the physiological aspects, but because
it impairs judgment, which can lead to mistakes and other
accidents.
Medical Issue-Some incidents that occur underground
cannot be contributed directly to the caving activity. Chron-
ic or acute medical conditions may present suddenly such
as cardiovascular events, migraines, allergic reactions, etc.
Lost-Getting lost underground can happen to experienced
and beginning cavers. Strategies to avoid becoming lost in-
clude: go with someone who knows the cave, take a cave
map (and know how to read it), and pay attention to land-
marks. Always let someone know where you are going and
when to expect your return. If you are overdue, a rescue can
be quickly organized.
Lost Control on Rappel-This incident-type category was
added in 2011 to cover incidents of persons losing control
while on rappel. In previous issues, these incidents were
listed under Caver Falls or Difficulty on Rope. While most
out-of-control rappels also result in a caver fall, the contrib-
uting factor or cause is very different than those typical for
caver falls.
Rock Fall-Shifting or falling rocks, either from natural
causes or human disturbance, can result in entrapment,
injury, or even death. Pay extra attention near the top and

---------- Page 6 ----------
bottom of pits.
Stuck-Stuck refers to the physical entrapment of a person
which prevents them from moving from their position. Be-
ing stuck is a serious situation as it can lead to hypothermia
and possibly crush syndrome.
Trapped or Stranded-This category describes any incident
in which the caver or cavers are prevented from exiting the
cave.
Guam
Hawaii
Other-This catch-all category includes incidents that don't
quite fit in other categories. Examples include twisting an
ankle or pulling a muscle during normal caving movement,
missing a callout time, surface objects falling into a pit, van-
dalism of rigged entrance ropes, and entrapment of a finger
between two objects.
2017 Cave Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
Larger dots = multiple incidents
N
1,000
Miles
2018 Cave Incidents
Legend
Incident Type
Caving
Cave Diving
Caving Related
Larger dots = multiple incidents
N
1,000
Miles

---------- Page 7 ----------
CAVING ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT STATISTICS
2/12/1986
Result of Incident
Result
Fatality
199 17 16 22 14 14 20 11 15 978159998956851459
Injury and Aid
28 33 26 17 16 13 13 18 15 13 8 14 12 81297576101068108
Aid, No Injury
55261711 6 15 2913 9812818
10 12 10 4 11 9 10428366601047227695989 11 4
Injury, No Aid
No Injury, No Aid
47 52 67 58 64 64 61 72 64 66 76 67 77 57 54 47 41 47 41 37 35 40 23 27 36 27 25 22 29 27 27 25 30 37 43 36 32
Total
Incident Type
Type
Caver Fall
Trapped/Stranded
Difficulty on Rope
Rock Fall
Lost
Flooding
$40366222311301212010000000
Hypothermia
Illness/Medical Issue


********** 4 24141123121002010100101210
Exhaustion
Drowning
Stuck
Bad Air
Acetylene-related
5 16 8 11 44220032000441100136122
Equipment Problem
Lost Control on Rappel
Other
Caving-related
Incidents
Cave Diving Incidents
Result
Fatality
Injury and Aid
Aid, no Injury
Injury, no Aid
No Injury, No Aid
Total

---------- Page 8 ----------
2017 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 14
Maxwelton Sink Cave
West Virginia
January 14
Maxwelton Sink Cave
West Virginia
January 15
Indian Grave Point Cave
Tennessee
January 29
Waianapanapa Freshwater Cave
Hawai'i
February 11
unspecified cave
Utah
February 20
unnamed glacier cave
B.C., Canada
March 4
Climax Cave
Kentucky
March 4
Serpiente Dormida
Costa Rica
April 2
Railroad Cave
New York
April 9
Raspberry Rising Cave
B.C., Canada
April 21
Berome Moore Cave
Missouri
May 12
Peppersauce Cave
Arizona
May 13
Peppersauce Cave
Arizona
May 27
Mandys Cave
Tennessee
June 8
Tumbling Rock Cave
Alabama
July 3
Marbo Cave
Guam
July 14
Natural Trap Cave
Wyoming
July 15
Robber Baron Cave
Texas
July 22
Fulford Cave
Colorado
July 23
Mr. Toad Cave
Vermont
July 27
Spring Hill Saltpeter Cave
Tennessee
July 29
Fulford Cave
Colorado
August 1
Gourdneck Cave
Tennessee
August 5
Cenote Lu'um Balam
Quintana Roo, Mexico
August 12
Culverson Creek Cave
West Virginia
August 12
Culverson Creek Cave
West Virginia
September 9
Bessie Butte Cave
Oregon
September 17
Sullivan Cave
Indiana
September 17
Bill Clinton Pot
Tennessee
October 6
Solution Rift
Tennessee
October 13
Bisaro Anima
B.C., Canada
November 16
Actun Tunichil Muknal
Belize
November 24
Grunge Plunge Cave
Tennessee
November 28
Crevasse Cave
Nevada
December 1
Valhalla Cave
Alabama
December 9
Pentagon Pit
Missouri
2017 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 8
Eagles Nest
Florida
September 24
Cannonball Cave
Missouri
2017 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
May 29
unnamed cave
Arizona
October 9
unspecified sinkhole
Missouri
December 31
unspecified cave
Georgia
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
medical issue
aid, no injury
stranded
fatality
drowning
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
fatality
caver fall
injury, no aid
other
fatality
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
other
injury, no aid
caver fall
fatality
drowning
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
other
aid, no injury
lost
injury, no aid
caver fall
fatality
drowning
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury, no aid
other
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded
injury and aid
rockfall
aid, no injury
stranded
injury, no aid
other
fatality
medical issue
aid, no injury
exhaustion
no injury, no aid
difficulty on rope
aid, no injury
equipment problem
no injury, no aid
other
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning
injury and aid
fell into sinkhole
dog fatality
stuck

---------- Page 9 ----------
2018 Reported Caving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 1
Bisaro Anima
B.C., Canada
January 7
Little Brush Creek Cave
Utah
January 21
Thunder Hole Cave
Alabama
February 4
Howards Waterfall Cave
Georgia
February 12
Arch Cave
B.C., Canada
February 17
Wind Caves
Pennsylvania
February 24
17 Mile Cave
Idaho
March 2
Raccoon Mountain Caverns
Tennessee
March 8
Robber Baron Cave
Texas
March 8
Pettyjohns Cave
Georgia
March 13
Sótano de los Enríquez
Coahuila, Mexico
April 1
Island Ford Cave
Virginia
April 9
Sistema Huautla
Oaxaca, Mexico
May 5
Chontalcoatlán
Guerrero, Mexico
June 23
Convention Cave
Massachusetts
July 10
Lava River Cave
Arizona
July 14
Cedar Knob Cave
Virginia
July 14
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave
Wyoming
July 18
Eagles Nest
Florida
August 1
Gargantua Cave
B.C., Canada
August 11
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave
Wyoming
August 11
Gear Cave
B.C., Canada
August 31
Main Drain Cave
Utah
September 3
unnamed talus cave
B.C., Canada
October 2
Beaver Creek Cave
Missouri
October 5
J-4 Cave
Pennsylvania
October 6
Kennamer Cave
Alabama
November 10
Shoveleater-Hellhole System
West Virginia
November 20
Actun Tunichil Muknal
Belize
November 24
Huccacove Cave
Colorado
December 30
unspecified cave
Arkansas
2018 Reported Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
January 20
Eagles Nest
Florida
June 16
Sistema Sac Actun, Cenote Manatí
Quintana Roo Mexico
August 23
Main Drain Cave
Utah
November 14
Sistema Sac Actun, Cenote Calimba
Quintana Roo Mexico
2018 Reported Caving-related Accidents and Incidents
Date
Cave
Location
February 10
unspecified cave
Tennessee
February 12
Bear Creek Cave
B.C., Canada
March 26
Carlsbad Caverns
New Mexico
October 10
Ausmus Well
Tennessee
October 27
Sloans Valley Cave
Kentucky
November 26
unspecified cave
Tennessee
Result
Incident Type
injury, no aid
other
injury and aid
caver fall
injury and aid
lost control on rappel
no injury, no aid
medical issue
aid, no injury
other
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
bad air
injury and aid
other
aid, no injury
stuck
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
aid, no injury
lost
no injury, no aid
flooding


********** 2 fatalities
drowning
injury and aid
stuck
injury and aid
caver fall
no injury, no aid
equipment problem
aid, no injury
lost
fatality
drowning
aid, no injury
other
aid, no injury
lost
injury, no aid
other
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
difficulty on rope/ladder
aid, no injury
other
aid, no injury
lost
no injury, no aid
medical issue
aid, no injury
flooding
injury, no aid
caver fall
injury and aid
caver fall
Result
Incident Type
fatality
drowning
fatality
drowning
no injury, no aid
equipment problem


********** 2 fatalities
drowning
Result
Incident Type
aid, no injury
dog fell into pit
injury and aid
caver fall
aid, no injury
stranded in elevator
2 dog fatalities
dogs fell into pit
aid, no injury
dog stranded in cave
aid, no injury
dog fell into pit

---------- Page 10 ----------
2017 Caving Accidents and Incidents


********** 14 January
Maxwelton Sink Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, injury, no aid
medical issue, no injury, no aid
Greg Springer (49) organized a trip to Maxwelton
Sink Cave to resurvey 2,800 feet of passages. The group
consisted of six cavers who split into two teams of three.
Springer led Tom Feeney (31) and Errol Glidden to a nar-
row canyon with both upper and lower leads. Feeney
climbed up to a ledge to look at a high lead. Looking for a
way back down, Feeney encountered greasy mud and be-
gan to slide out of control. He went over an edge with a
14-foot drop below it. Glidden was near the edge and tried
to help, managing to shove Feeney sideways. This interfer-
ence caused Feeney to land on an outcropping 7 feet below
the edge. He landed hard, but at least he had not fallen all
the way to the bottom.
Feeney had the wind knocked out of him and felt
pain in his back and ribs. He took ibuprofen and thought
he felt well enough to continue the survey. Thirty-three sta-
tions later, however, his injuries became more problematic
and the group decided to call it a day. Traveling out of the
cave was slow and painful, but Feeney made it out under
his own power with Glidden carrying his pack part of the
way.
During their exit, Springer began feeling unwell.
His heart was racing and he was unable to keep up with
Feeney and Glidden. He had difficulty catching his breath
and had to take several rest breaks. Glidden reported be-
ing able to hear Springer's heartbeat, even from several feet
away.
Springer noted in his report, "[Feeney] later re-
ported he had severely bruised and strained his ribs and
muscles. He won't be over the fall for some time. I wish
we had left sooner, but I'm not sure any of us realized how
badly he was hurt. As for me-well, it is hell getting old!"
1. Greg Springer, "Madness in Maxwelton!" The West Virginia
Caver, April 2017, Volume 35, Number 2, page 12.
2. Tom Feeney, "1.14: Maxwelton Sink Cave," The West Virginia
Caver, April 2017, Volume 35, Number 2, page 15.
Comments: Both men were later examined by phy-
sicians. Feeney had broken one rib. In many cases, the true
extent of an injury does not become apparent for several
hours. Immediately after an accident, the patient's body
often releases adrenaline. This, in conjunction with other
psychosomatic responses, serves to dull and mask pain.
In time, these masking responses decrease as swelling in-
creases leading to a more painful and possibly debilitating
situation. Rib injuries are especially subject to this delayed
pain and stiffness. While no one wants to feel responsible
for an aborted trip, it is often safest to exit after any accident
with the potential for significant after-effects. In some cases,
the trip leader must step in and make the decision for the
team to exit.
No cause was determined for Springer's symptoms
other than possible dehydration.


********** 15 January
Indian Grave Point Cave, Tennessee
stranded, aid, no injury
At approximately 2:30 a.m., the Smithville-DeKalb
County Rescue Squad was notified that someone was
trapped in Indian Grave Point Cave. An unidentified man
was rescued after he had used a rope to lower himself down
a "60-foot hole" but was then unable to climb back out.
1. Staff, "Man rescued from Dry Creek Cave," www.smithvillere-
view.com, 17 January 2017.
Comments: The man and his group were novice
cavers without proper gear or training. Indian Grave Point
Cave is a popular cave for locals.


********** 29 January
Waianapanapa Freshwater Cave, Hawai'i
fatality, drowning
Gregory Wilhelm (33) of Novato, California, was
swimming with friends outside of Waianapanapa Fresh-
water Cave. He and a male companion swam into the cave
using the flashlight feature on a cell phone that was pro-
tected in a plastic bag. The friend exited the cave first, and
when Wilhelm did not emerge, the friend swam back into
the cave to look for him. He found Wilhelm's cell phone,
then exited the cave and called for help. Wilhelm's body
was recovered later that day.
1. Web staff, "California visitor dies at Waianapanapa Freshwater
Caves in Hana," www.khon2.com, 31 January 2017.
2. Star-Advertiser staff, "California man pulled from Maui fresh-
water cave identified," www.staradvertiser.com, 31 January 2017.
Comments: The reason for Wilhelm's drowning
was not determined.


********** 11 February
unspecified cave, Utah
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
A caver (21) was rappelling in a multi-drop cave
when one side of his harness came out of his D-ring. The
caver was able to make it to a ledge, reattach his harness,
and secure the D-ring before completing his rappel. The
caver was not sure if his D-ring had been open on previous
rappels that day or if it was only open on this particular
drop.
1. Anonymous, Incident Report, 6 November 2017.
Comments: Carabiner gates and screw-link clo-
sures should be checked before loading vertical gear after

---------- Page 11 ----------
any period of unloading. Unloading occurs not only when
getting off rope, but also at rebelays and ledges. Cavers
should use a visual and tactile check of these potential fail-
ure points before each instance of trusting them to hold
their body weight.
The reporting party submitted this report with the
request of anonymity. It is not uncommon for cavers to be
embarrassed about making mistakes we know we shouldn't.
This is the reason that American Caving Accidents exists-to
speak honestly about our mistakes and share our experi-
ences SO that future accidents can be prevented. Please re-
port all accidents, incidents, and near misses to ACA. While
including names and ages can sometimes provide clearer
context and relevance for other cavers, ACA maintains the
anonymity of cave and caver names when requested.


********** 20 February
unnamed glacier cave, British Columbia, Canada
fatality, caver fall
Three young adults entered a glacier cave in Kakwa
Provincial Park, British Columbia, while two other adults
waited outside. The group entering the cave used cell-
phones for flashlights. While in the cave, a 21-year-old man
slipped and fell into a 150-foot-deep crevasse. The Alberta-
British Columbia Cave Rescue group was alerted but then
received word that the individual had died. A recovery was
conducted the next day by Jasper National Park personnel.
1. Christian Stenner, Incident Report, 28 February 2017.
2. Dave Merrit, personal communication, April 2018.


********** 4 March
Climax Cave, Kentucky
other, injury, no aid
Debi Pavey (50) broke a bone in the top of her foot
while on a recreational trip in Climax Cave. The accident
occurred as Pavey was exiting a side passage 2 feet above
the floor of the main passage. Because the distance was not
significant, she "leapt" out of the passage instead of lower-
ing herself down gently. She rolled her foot upon landing
and thought that she had pulled a muscle. After crawling
out of the cave, she spent the weekend limping and taking
pain medication. A physician diagnosed the broken bone
the following Monday.
1. Debi Pavey, Incident Report, 24 May 2017.
Comments: Adrenalin and pain killers may mask
the extent of certain injuries. With any injury, it is a good
idea to be examined by a physician as soon as possible to
begin a proper recovery and prevent further injury. This
incident highlights the importance of maintaining three
points of contact at all times-even in seemingly "easy" sec-
tions of a cave. When leaping through the air, a caver has
zero points of contact.


********** 4 March
Cueva de Serpiente Dormida, Costa Rica
fatality, caver fall
José Alfaro (45) and other cavers prepared to enter
Serpiente Dormida. The first pit is approximately 180 feet
deep and requires two rebelays. Alfaro, being an experi-
enced vertical caver was put in charge of rigging the pit.
After rigging the second rebelay, Alfaro was 100 feet above
the floor. He had been deploying rope from a rope bag as
he rappelled. The bag contained two lengths of rope of the
same color. Tragically, the ropes were not tied together and
neither was knotted at the end. After passing the second
rebelay, Alfaro rappelled approximately 20 feet before he
rappelled off the end of the first rope, falling approximately
80 feet to the floor.
His fellow cavers heard him fall and reached him
as quickly as possible. Alfaro had suffered compound frac-
tures to his legs, and trauma to his head and face. He died
a few minutes later.
1. Erick Mendez, e-mail communication, 4 March 2019.
2. Victor Hugo Carvajal Rivera, Reportes de Accidentes, undated.
Comments: When deploying rope from a rope bag
tethered just below a rappeler, it is nearly impossible for the
rappeler to detect an unknotted end of rope leaving the bag
and approaching the descending device before it is too late.
A rope should always have a confirmed end knot or a knot
connecting it to another rope before deploying it from a bag
while rappelling.
José Alfaro was a much-loved and respected caver
in the Costa Rican caving community. Cavers speculate that
he was most likely unaware that there were two ropes in
the rope bag. It is not clear if this rope bag was prepared by
Alfaro or by someone else. Caving clubs that use club gear
should standardize and follow strict protocols for packing
rope bags. Ideally, each rigger will pack and inspect his or
her own rope bag before use. When packing someone else's
bag, tie the rope ends or connection knots and show them
to the rigger. Do not pack the rope bag until after the rigger
clearly confirms that he or she has seen the knots.
Some European clubs advise to tie two knots in the
free end of the rope-the first one 1 meter (3 feet) from the
end and the second 2 meters (6 feet) from the end. This way,
the rigger knows that when the first knot is reached, there
is still 6 feet of rope to build into a rebelay or other rope
connection.


********** 2 April
Railroad Cave, New York
stranded, aid, no injury
On 2 April, Stephen Berge, Christian Madaras, and
Mike Jordan went ridgewalking in Greene County with the
additional purpose of cleaning up caves in Austin Glen.
When they neared the entrance to Railroad Cave, they no-
ticed a cell phone. As they were discussing who may have
left it there, they heard a shout from inside the cave. A man
in his late 20s yelled up that he had been unable to climb

---------- Page 12 ----------
out for over an hour and had sent his companion to call the
local fire department.
The entrance to the cave is an approximately
25-foot-deep pit and there was an old 20-foot ladder in the
pit, requiring about 5 feet of climbing at the top. The young
man could not negotiate these last few feet. Berge explains,
"Luckily we had a webbing ladder and several strands of
webbing to rig up something to help him climb out, sav-
ing the firefighters a long walk down to the creek. The guy
who was rescued had no helmet or light. Luckily, he wasn't
alone and we showed up when we did. After that the ladder
was removed to avoid people getting in similar situations."
Entering the cave now requires vertical gear or a cable lad-
der.
1. Stephen Berge, "Railroad Rescue," Northeastern Caver, Volume
48, Issue 2, page 35, June 2017.
Comments: The novice caver must be commended
for calling for help instead of attempting a climb for which
he did not possess the necessary skill or equipment. As in
the resolution to this incident, it is usually best to remove
ladders and other implements meant to supplant vertical
gear and technique when they do not fully and safely elimi-
nate the vertical problem.
Cavers assist a man out of Railroad Cave. Photo by Stephen Berge.


********** 9 April
Raspberry Rising Cave, British Columbia,
Canada
caver fall, injury, no aid
At the end of a caving trip in Raspberry Rising,
a group of four cavers was exiting the cave. After diving
a sump 250 feet inside the cave from the entrance they
changed out of their diving gear near the stream. While
changing, Adam Walker (36) had removed his helmet, he
then slipped backward while standing on wet rocks, falling
and hitting the back of his head on a rock. The remainder
of the group had already exited the cave. Walker emerged
at the entrance to meet his group with a painful contusion
and bleeding from a small but deep cut in his scalp. The
scalp laceration was treated with a gauze pad and bandage
to hold it in place for the hike down the mountain. Upon his
return home, Walker sought medical attention and received
two stitches to close the wound.
1. Adam Walker, personal communication, 15 April 2017.
2. Christian Stenner, "Reflections of Raspberry," Journal of Subter-
ranean Metaphysics, N. 200, Fall 2018.
Comments: This incident highlights the importance
of wearing a helmet on any uneven terrain and the safety
benefits of keeping the team together. It is also a reminder
that the trip is not over until all members have returned
home safely.


********** 21 April
Berome Moore Cave, Missouri
caver fall, injury, no aid
Laura Belarbi led a team of six cavers into Berome
Moore Cave on a stream monitoring trip. As the trip leader,
Belarbi had discussed proper gear, including boots, with
her group. One woman showed up wearing tennis shoes
and insisted that she had caved in tennis shoes before and
would be fine.
At one point during the trip, another experienced
caver was in the lead. When he reached a spot that required
stepping across a gap with the stream 6 feet below, he made
the move easily. When the woman in tennis shoes attempt-
ed to cross this gap, her foot slid upon landing and she fell
across the boulder onto her stomach, injuring her wrist in
the process. She told the group she would be fine to con-
tinue. Belarbi notes, "She was the note-taker for our stream
monitoring for the next 2 1/2 hours and didn't complain at
all."
Immediately after the trip, the injured woman went
to an urgent care facility and was diagnosed with a broken
wrist. She was placed in a cast that she wore for the next six
weeks.
1. Laura Belarbi, Incident Report, 24 April 2017.
Comments: One of the most difficult aspects of trip
leadership can be to stand up for safety or ethical standards
when it affects someone's ability to participate in a trip. In

---------- Page 13 ----------
her report, Belarbi explains that she should have been more
insistent that her group members wear proper footwear.
She also mentions that when leading beginners, experi-
enced cavers should take more care in their movements in a
cave. She notes that, especially when some group members
have sub-optimal gear, everyone on the trip should take
some responsibility for the safety of less-experienced team
members and adjust trip goals and expectations according-
ly. For instance, Belarbi says she should have led the begin-
ner down to the stream and up the other side rather than
letting her follow the other caver across the 3-foot gap.


********** 12 May
Peppersauce Cave, Arizona
stranded, aid, no injury
On 13 May, Sara Avery wrote on Facebook that
she and her friend had difficulty exiting through a section
of Peppersauce Cave known as the Rabbit Hole. They had
slipped down through the muddy hole easily enough but
then found it difficult to go back up and through the same
hole. Avery made it through after several attempts and a
"mini-freakout session." Her friend had even more trouble
and asked that Avery go get help. Avery did not describe
the events of the rescue, but went into detail regarding gear
she wished she had had (more batteries, a phone with mu-
sic on it) and gear she was glad that she had - a helmet,
long sleeves, and elbow pads.
1. Sara Avery, Facebook, 13 May 2017.
Comments: Peppersauce Cave is known for having
many underprepared visitors. When climbing down some-
thing that may be difficult to climb back up, it is often pru-
dent to rig a handline before descending.
This incident was detailed on the Peppersauce Cave
Facebook page by Sara Avery. Because her friend needed
the aid of the local Search and Rescue group, Avery said
she could leave only a three-star review on the Peppersauce
Cave Facebook page.


********** 13 May
Peppersauce Cave, Arizona
caver fall, injury and aid
The day after rescuing a woman from Peppersauce
Cave in the above incident, the Pinal County Sheriff's Office
rescued another person from the same area in the cave. A
46-year-old man had fallen and injured his back and knee.
The Pinal County Search and Rescue team and Oracle Fire
Department performed the rescue.
1. Pinal County Sheriff's Office Facebook page, 15 May 2017.
Comments: Peppersauce Cave is visited by liter-
ally thousands of underprepared visitors each year and
has been the site of much vandalism and many rescues. As
an organization dedicated to cave safety and conservation
with local chapters in the area, the NSS would do well to
study how to better serve this cave, its visitors, its manag-
ers, and local search and rescue organizations.


********** 27 May
Mandys Cave, Tennessee
other, no injury, no aid
Jim Smith, Bill Steele, Hali Steinmann, Lee White,
and Kyle Lassiter entered Mandys Cave through the upper
vertical entrance, which is inside a deep sinkhole. Fifteen
feet of descending, stooping passage then a 90-degree bend
leads to a short entrance pit. After completing the survey
for the day, Lassiter was ready to ascend the near-entrance
pit, but Smith stopped him for a few minutes to take some
photos. Just as Lassiter was getting off rope at the top of the
pit, he heard a tremendous crash outside the entrance. He
couldn't see what had happened outside, because the en-
trance was around a corner. Everyone else in the cave heard
it as well.
Carefully, Lassiter climbed out to discover that a
large, rotten log had slid into the sinkhole from above and
had hit the ground immediately in front of the entrance. It
then broke into several pieces and rolled further down into
the sinkhole. In his report, Lassiter notes that the delay to
take photos may have saved his life, as he might have been
hit by the log if he had come out a few minutes earlier.
1. Bill Steele, Facebook, 30 May 2017.
2. Kyle Lassiter, Incident Report, 13 December 2017.
Lee White standing near the entrance of Mandys Cave. A log
rolled down the hill and landed where White is standing a short
time later. Photo by Bill Steele.

---------- Page 14 ----------
Comments: Lassiter concluded his report saying,
"That log had probably been lying there undisturbed for
years, and there was no reason to suspect it was going to
fall in that day. Weather was not a factor as it was a warm,
sunny day with no wind or rain to help get the log moving.
I guess the lesson here is to check for widowmakers above
entrances, although even in this case I doubt we would
have noticed this log 25 feet above the entrance lying on the
ground."
A helpful safety practice for any vertical pitch, be it
surface or underground, is to mentally delineate a bound-
ary between the safety zone and the vertical fall zone at
both the top and the bottom of the pitch. The safety zone
includes everywhere where one can safely not be attached
to a rope. The fall (or hazard, or danger) zone can be quite
large in relation to the actual pit, defined at the top as
within the furthest perimeter where a falling object could
enter the pit, defined at the bottom as within the furthest
perimeter where falling objects could hit, including due to
ricochet. The fall zone should be entered or exited with a
vocal call of "on rope," "off rope," or similar; only one caver
should occupy the fall zone at a time. In addition, the fall
zone should ideally be "groomed" of any objects with the
potential to become falling objects. As Lassiter points out in
his report, this is an ideal that is often not fully realized, as
some pits can have very large areas above them included in
the fall zone.


********** 8 June
Tumbling Rock Cave, Alabama
caver fall, injury, no aid
On 8 June, six cavers entered Tumbling Rock Cave
at 4:00 p.m. They went as far as the Christmas Tree forma-
tion and then turned around. At 6:30 p.m., near the black
flowstone formation, Christine Rose (41) slid off a rock and
into water. Rose landed with her right foot on a submerged
rock. This caused Rose considerable pain and she found
she could not put any weight on her foot. Rose used a Sam
Splint and extra webbing from her pack to splint her foot.
Her fellow cavers helped her to negotiate the 1 mile of cave
to the entrance in about two hours. At a medical facility,
Rose was diagnosed with a tibia fracture and tendon dam-
age.
1. Christine Rose, Incident Report, 15 June 2017.
Comments: In her report, Rose (herself a trained
cave rescuer) says this incident is a good reminder of sever-
al things: minor slips or miscalculations can result in major
problems; injuries can result from things that are not out of
the ordinary or necessarily dangerous or high risk; patient
attitude and determination greatly influences the outcome;
and self-rescue, when possible, is often preferable to a call-
out rescue.


********** 3 July
Marbo Cave, Guam
fatality, drowning
Thomson Puas (15) was visiting Marbo Cave with
his older brother, an uncle, and a friend. They spent an hour
at the entrance before swimming into the cave. Once inside,
the group did not see Puas. His brother eventually located
him under water. The group brought Puas out of the cave,
began CPR, and called 911. Puas was pronounced dead at
the hospital.
1. Jasmine Stole and Masako Watanabe, "Teen who drowned at
Marbo Cave was Okkodo High student," www.guampdn.com, 5
July 2017.
Comments: Marbo Cave is a popular destination
for both locals and tourists. This incident is the third death
by drowning at Marbo Cave since 2014.


********** 14 July
Natural Trap Cave, Wyoming
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
For many years, Natural Trap Cave has been the
site of paleontological studies. Researchers receive special
training from cavers to safely enter the vertical entrance,
but they are also belayed, per the required Bureau of Land
Management permit.
On 14 July, a male paleontologist got his hair caught
in his rack while descending the entrance. According to the
report, "Due to his inability to unweight his rack despite
eventually getting his ascender on the rope, and in the dif-
ficulty of the belayer trying to make communications from
approximately 60 feet above, and at least three people just
below him also adding to the verbal confusion, the belayer
decided to take control."
The belayer, using gear from his own harness, in-
cluding a small pulley, converted the belay line to a 3:1 haul
system. This mechanical advantage allowed the belayer to
single-handedly raise the 170-pound man high enough to
unweight his rack. After removing his hair from the rack,
the paleontologist was able to rappel the final 15 feet.
1. Juan Laden, Incident Report, 26 July 2017.
Comments: Several lessons can be learned from this
incident including: that most forms of belay require human
skill and attention in order to function properly. These ac-
tive belays are only as good as the human operating them.
In this case, the belayer not only provided a successful belay
to the compromised primary system, but he was also able
to create and implement a solution to the entire problem.
A small amount of extra gear like a pulley, prusik, or sling
can make the difference in successful vertical problem-solv-
ing. Alternately, with the most rudimentary of Single Rope
Technique (SRT) training, practice, and skill, the rappeler
should have been able to achieve the same unloading of the
descender on his own by performing a simple changeover
to ascent. The fact that he was unable to do SO highlights the

---------- Page 15 ----------
need for a separate belay in this situation. After 60 years of
vertical caving using SRT, cavers are still getting their hair
caught in descent devices. Plan accordingly.


********** 15 July
Robber Baron Cave, Texas
caver fall, injury, no aid
Lori Harris (54) was part of a Bexar Grotto team
leading a group of Boy Scouts in Robber Baron Cave. Ap-
proximately 45 minutes into the trip, the group entered
the Great Southwest Passage. This passage is a tall, narrow
crevice requiring stemming for approximately 60 feet. The
walls are scalloped limestone, and on this day, they were
slightly damp. Harris had traversed approximately 5 feet
into the crevice when the people ahead of her stopped. Af-
ter five minutes of not moving, one of her feet slipped, caus-
ing her to fall approximately 10 feet. She pressed against the
cave walls with both hands and feet in an attempt to slow
her fall. Harris landed with both legs straight and immedi-
ately noticed pain below her left knee.
The Scouts were nearing the end of the passage
when they informed the trip leader, Michael Harris, that his
wife may have fallen. Michael Harris assigned the role of
trip leader to another grotto member and then backtracked
to find Michael Gibbons already in the process of assessing
the injury. Once they determined that Harris could not bear
weight on her left leg, they began a self-rescue. Michael
Harris assisted his wife in climbing to the upper part of the
passage by helping with foot placement and hand-holds.
From there she was further assisted and carried back to the
cave entrance and eventually to a vehicle. She was seen by a
physician and diagnosed with a tibial plateau fracture.
1. Lori Harris, Incident Report, 4 November 2019.


********** 22 July
Fulford Cave, Colorado
caver fall, injury, no aid
Michael Kienker (60) was leading a group of three
novice cavers on a tour of Fulford Cave. He was in the lead
when they entered an area called the Stovepipe, which
leads into the Attic Room. At the end of the Stovepipe is a U-
shaped slot that most adults have difficulty fitting through.
On the other side of the slot, in the Attic, is a sloping flow-
stone shelf with a 3- to 4-foot drop to the floor from the
edge. The safest approach into the room is to maneuver 4
feet or SO onto the shelf beyond the slot with the use of a
handline, and then slide down the shelf and over the edge
to the floor. Kienker's intent was to get into the room and
toss a loop of webbing over a large stalagmite at the top of
the sloping shelf to help each of the other cavers into the
room.
Kienker tossed his pack into the room and lifted
himself up and over the slot. Immediately, his feet went
out from under him and he went into an uncontrolled slide
down the flowstone shelf. At the edge of the shelf was a bro-
ken stalagmite sticking up about 1 inch from the surface of
the slope. Kienker hit this stalagmite with his tailbone and
then fell over the edge to the floor below. Other than pain in
his tailbone, he was otherwise unhurt.
Kienker was able to stand up, get the hand line
thrown over the stalagmite at the top of the slope, and as-
sist the other cavers safely down the shelf into the room. He
was in pain but was able to get himself and the others out
of the cave with no further incident. X-rays later revealed a
fracture of the first segment of the coccyx.
1. Michael Kienker, Incident Report, 30 July 2017.
Comments: In his report, Kienker reflects that he
should have installed the handline prior to entering the
room, and that he should have taken more time maneuver-
ing over the slot.


********** 23 July
Mr. Toad Cave, Vermont
caver fall, injury and aid
At approximately 10:45 a.m. on 23 July, eight cav-
ers entered the Mr. Toad Cave System to work on two dig
projects. The cave is a 46° F alpine marble cave with many
short climbs, several waterfalls, various tight crawlways,
and some vertical drops. The group entered through a hori-
zontal entrance and did not bring vertical gear, but their
route included a 25-foot climb down an angled wall with
sharp edges. The climb is about 150 feet from the surface
and requires cavers to negotiate two short vertical fissures,
a 30-foot-long belly crawl, and a corkscrew crawl to reach
the top of it. This drop can be free-climbed, but is typically
rigged with a cable ladder to make it easier to carry gear up
and down. Use of SRT here is not standard due to numer-
ous sharp rub points.
Once in the cave, the group split into two four-
person teams to work on dig projects a few hundred feet
apart. After several hours, two members of the lower dig
team decided to leave the cave. Under normal circumstanc-
es, they were about 15 minutes from the surface, including
the cable-ladder climb. Around 3:00 p.m., one of the cav-
ers (mid 50s) had difficulty climbing the ladder and took
a 6-foot fall at the bottom. He seemed uninjured, SO after
some rest, food, and water, he attempted the climb again.
With difficulty, and with aid from the other caver, he made
it much of the way up the ladder to a large ledge.
The other caver joined him on the ledge and dem-
onstrated how to complete the climb. After additional rest,
food, and water, the first caver attempted to complete the
climb. He reports that he had difficulty finding his footing,
attempted to lower himself back to the ledge, and lost his
hold on the ladder. He then fell backward approximately
14 feet onto breakdown. The other caver assessed him, de-
termined that the patient needed assistance, and called the
other two members of the lower dig team, who alerted the
upper dig team. One member of the upper team was a fire-
fighter and EMT; he reassessed the patient and found the
patient to have shortness of breath as well as crepitus (a
grating sound) and pain in his right shoulder. The group
decided to call for rescue.

---------- Page 16 ----------
The cavers broke into teams and prepared to evacu-
ate the patient. One team of three stayed with the patient.
Another team of two departed for the surface to call the
group's on-call backup person and 911; this team also be-
gan flagging a trail to the nearest road access. An additional
person went to the surface to collect equipment, then re-
turned to the cave to help set up a haul system at the top of
the 25-foot drop.
Within an hour of the incident, the group (which
included two EMTs and four cavers with cave-rescue train-
ing) had called 911, notified their backup person, and acti-
vated the Vermont Cave Rescue Network to get additional
cavers and the Vermont Cavers Association (VCA) rescue
cache en route to the scene. Meanwhile, the in-cave team
gave the patient food and water, wrapped him in additional
warm layers, and protected him with trash bags to provide
a vapor barrier and protection from the spray of nearby wa-
terfalls.
The first major hurdle in the rescue was lifting the
patient up the 25-foot climb. The EMTs performed a fo-
cused spinal assessment to rule out spinal injury, but the
patient's shortness of breath prevented him from climbing
on his own. Bolts were in place at the top of the drop, but
the cavers were limited by the equipment they had in-cave.
This image shows the accident site in Mr. Toad Cave. The patient fell
from the highest visible rung of the ladder to the floor behind the
breakdown. Photo by John Dunham.
The rigging team was able to set up a 3:1 haul system with
carabiners and webbing, but that system proved ineffective
due to friction.
Due to the lack of rescue gear immediately avail-
able, the team had to wait an extra two hours for pulleys
and rope, which were in their vehicles a mile away. Ad-
ditional equipment arrived in-cave around 6:15 p.m., at
which point the cavers rigged a 2:1 counterweight haul sys-
tem using pulleys and rescue harnesses from the initial fire-
fighter responders, and an 11mm static rope brought by the
group's back-up person. Approximately 3.5 hours after the
initial fall, the cavers were able to begin lifting the patient
up the drop.
At the top of the drop, the patient had to negoti-
ate a tight corkscrew about 15 feet long. This was especially
difficult with shortness of breath and pain on his right side,
but he was able to do SO with assistance. By this point the
VCA rescue cache had arrived. The cavers filled holes in
the floor with packs and dragged the patient through the
30-foot-long crawlway on a SKED stretcher. Once through
the crawlway, he was able, with assistance, to climb the two
fissures and then exit the cave. He exited the cave at 8:45
p.m.
The patient was transferred to EMS care and taken
down a newly cut trail opened by the firefighter respond-
ers to a waiting ATV. The scene was cleared at 11:15 p.m., a
little more than eight hours after the initial injury.
1. John Dunham, Incident Report, 28 July 2017.
Comments: The submitted Incident Report includ-
ed its own analysis: this rescue could have been avoided
altogether. It is commonly noted in American Caving Acci-
dents that cable ladders should be accompanied with a belay.
Certainly, had that been the case here, the patient's injuries
would have been less severe or non-existent. This climb will
be rigged with a belay line on future trips. The rescue could
have been expedited had rope and pulleys been on hand
at the cave entrance. This would have allowed rigging of a
successful haul system one to two hours sooner. The group
involved intends to carry a small haul system in the future."


********** 27 July
Spring Hill Saltpeter Cave, Tennessee
other, injury and aid
A 16-year-old boy required rescue after he hurt his
ankle while exploring a cave near his home. He was close
enough to the entrance to obtain a cell signal and call for
help. Reports did not state how he hurt his ankle.
1. Staff, "Anderson County Rescue Squad extricates teen from
cave," www.wate.com, 27 July 2017.
2. Kelly Reinke, "Anderson County Volunteer Rescue Squad
warns about cave dangers," www.wate.com, 28 July 2017
Comments: Although we do not know the extent
of his ankle injury, it is interesting to compare reports of
experienced cavers self-rescuing versus non-cavers calling
for rescue even from the entrance of a cave.

---------- Page 17 ----------


********** 29 July
Fulford Cave, Colorado
lost, aid, no injury
On 29 July, four National Cave Rescue Commission
(NCRC) instructors entered Fulford Cave for the purpose of
scouting the cave as a location for an upcoming cave-rescue
training. When they entered the Big Room, they saw two
young men high up on a ledge. After a few minutes, the
young men called out and asked how to get down into the
Big Room. They said they had been lost for an hour and
could not retrace their steps. Andy Armstrong and Rich
Pumplin helped guide them down off the ledge, showing
them the location of the best hand- and footholds. In the 36°
F cave, the two men were wearing shorts, tennis shoes, and
headlamps without helmets. Bonny Armstrong led them
out of the room and back along the main trail until they rec-
ognized where they were. The men were very appreciative
of the help and thanked their rescuers profusely.
1. Bonny Armstrong, Incident Report, 3 August 2017.
Comments: Fulford Cave, despite requiring a USFS
permit to enter, still has many underprepared visitors. In
addition to being underequipped with clothing or safety
gear, these men had no watch and had been in the cave
twice as long as they thought.


********** 1 August
Gourdneck Cave, Tennessee
caver fall, injury, no aid
Kyle Lassiter (26), Maureen Handler, and Blaine
Grindle were exiting Gourdneck Cave after a four-hour: sur-
vey trip. As Lassiter began climbing out of a water canyon,
he stepped across a 3-foot span to stem across the passage
and climb to a higher level. As he transferred his weight
to his foot, the foothold broke and he fell 10 feet, landing
on his back in shallow water. He suffered a laceration and
contusion to his right shin, but fortunately missed hitting
any of the numerous solution pendants or projections that
are prevalent in that section of the canyon passage. Handler
administered first aid and Lassiter was able to drive himself
home.
1. Kyle Lassiter, Incident Report, 4 August 2017.
Comments: In his report, Lassiter concludes,
"When attempting free climbs, the rule of thumb is to try
and maintain three points of contact at all times, in case a
hold breaks or you slip. However, many of us, including
myself, can get comfortable in well-traveled and familiar
caves and not adhere to this ideal. In hindsight, I was basi-
cally on only one "good" point when the fall occurred, SO
a fall was guaranteed when my foothold broke. I have over
20 years of caving experience, and this is by far my most
significant incident and fall. On future caving trips I will
definitely be more cautious on my climbs and make a con-
scious effort to try to maintain three points of contact. This
is a great lesson in guarding against complacency that I will
thankfully recover and learn from."


********** 5 August
Cenote Lu'um Balam, Quintana Roo, Mexico
fatality, drowning
Dmitry Chernov, a 32-year-old Russian national
and temporary resident of Quintana Roo, attempted to free
dive (breath holding) into Cenote Lu'um Balam. He swam
from open water into an air bell in the cave. From there
he could not retrace his exit and continued farther in the
wrong direction. He maneuvered through a very tight con-
striction and then drowned.
Several attempts to recover his body, from the di-
rection he had entered, were unsuccessful due to zero visi-
bility conditions and the tight restriction. The final recovery
solution involved drilling a 36-inch-diameter hole through
26 feet of bedrock to reach the body. This required a precise
survey to locate where the drill hole would be placed. A
bulldozer was used to clear a path through the jungle and
20 truckloads of gravel were brought in to build a road for
the drill rig. Next, a 4-inch test drill and further dives de-
termined that the location was correct. Chernov's body was
finally recovered on 11 August.
1. German Rincon, "Man drowns cave diving," www.riviera-
maya-news.com, 9 August 2017.
2. Jim Coke, e-mail communication, 21 October 2017.
3. Bil Phillips, e-mail communication, 24 October 2017.
Comments: Accidents from free diving into a cave
without scuba gear are classified as caving accidents and
not as cave diving accidents.


********** 12 August
Culverson Creek Cave, West Virginia
caver fall, injury, no aid
other, injury, no aid
A trip to Culverson Creek Cave led to two injuries
in separate incidents for one caver. After six hours of re-
rigging pits and flagging a route through breakdown, the
cavers began the trip out. Mark Hodge (54) had gone a
short distance when he "took an ill-advised step on muddy
breakdown" and lost his balance. He fell to the ground, and
in the process, badly bruised his coccyx on a sharp piece of
breakdown. The pain was considerable. Hodge took some
ibuprofen which helped with the pain, and decided that he
would be able to exit the cave without assistance.
On the way out of the cave, the group had to ascend
three pits. Two of the ropes are rigged over smoothly slop-
ing bedrock. The rope lies against the rock SO that when as-
cending, cavers must push away from the rock to advance
their upper ascender. On one of the climbs, Hodge pinched
his pinky finger between the ascender and rock. He quickly
pulled his hand away, breaking his little finger in the pro-
cess. Hodge attributes the second incident to being cold and
tired from the long trip and being distracted by the pain
from the first incident.
1. Mark Hodge, Incident Report, 25 September 2017.

---------- Page 18 ----------
Comments: While it was almost certainly the right
call for Hodge to exit and ascend under his own power, this
incident reminds us that cavers already compromised by
injury or illness are more likely to sustain further injury.
Compromised cavers should be monitored and assisted
wherever and however possible on the way out of the cave.
Care should always be taken to keep fingers and
other body parts from becoming pinched behind loaded
rope and hardware.
Mark Hodge displays the permanent damage to his finger after pinching
it between a rope and the cave. Photo by Bonny Armstrong.


********** 9 September
Bessie Butte Cave, Oregon
caver fall, injury and aid
Five rock climbers entered Bessie Butte Cave and
negotiated a 26-foot-deep pit with a tow strap. While try-
ing to climb out, one of the men fell and was injured. Other
members of the group called 911. Bend Fire Department
responded and was assisted by a local search and rescue
group with cave-rescue training. The man's injuries were
not reported but were said to be non-life threatening.
1. KTVC staff, "Bend man injured in Bessie Butte Cave fall, res-
cued, technical operation involved several agencies," www.ktvz.
com, 9 September 2017.
2. Neil Marchington, e-mail communication, 10 September 2017.
3. Eddy Cartaya, e-mail communication, 23 October 2017.
Comments: Unfortunately, people often find in-
formation about locating caves before finding information
about caving safety. This is one of the primary reasons that
most cavers do not approve of posting cave locations on the
Internet.


********** 17 September
Sullivan Cave, Indiana
stranded, aid, no injury
Twelve members of the Caving Club of Indiana
University (CCIU), including the club president and a trip
leader, visited Sullivan Cave for a club outing on a Sunday
morning. Sullivan Cave is managed by the Indiana Karst
Conservancy and is popular with Scout groups and NSS
grottos.
The group explored several sections of the cave.
When they decided it was time to head out of the cave, the
club broke into two groups. The club president led the faster
group of students while the trip leader stayed behind with
the slower-moving students. At some point, a 19-year-old
freshman left the slower group to catch up with the faster
group, but he missed a critical turn toward the entrance.
Once he realized his mistake, he turned around and headed
toward the entrance.
The two groups exited the cave and locked the cave
gate behind them. The club president did a head count in
the parking area, counting 11 people. Believing this was the
number they started with, the group got into three vehicles.
Some students rode home in different vehicles than they
arrived in. The trip leader later noted that he arrived with
four people but left with five.
On the following Tuesday, the caving club received
a call inquiring about one student who had been on the
cave trip. Lukas Cavar had not been seen by his roommates
or family since Sunday. The trip leader alerted authorities
and with others rushed back to the cave and found Cavar
waiting just inside the locked entrance gate. The rescuers
had brought food and a change of clothes for him. The trip
leader performed a medical assessment and found Cavar to
be hungry and thirsty but otherwise unhurt.
This incident made national news and several ar-
ticles recount Cavar's ordeal of being locked alone in the
cave for nearly 60 hours. He tried reaching his phone as far
through the cave gate as possible, but he could not get a
cellular signal. Cavar said he was confused and scared and
licked moisture from the cave walls.
1. Bruce Bowman, Incident Report, 22 September 2017.
2. Katie Cox, "Indiana University student licked moisture off
walls while trapped inside cave for three days," www.theindy-
channel.com, 22 September 2017.
3. Kylee Wierks, "IU student survives 3 days locked in cave after
group forgets him, forced to lick moisture from cave walls,"
www.fox59.com, 22 September 2017.
Comments: While there were many contributing
factors, this incident was triggered by Cavar's decision to
leave the supervised group he was with and to try to find
the other group on his own. With the benefit of hindsight, it
seems easy to question the trip leader's decision to let him
do this.
Large groups are difficult to manage underground.
Opinions differ on what constitutes a large group. Many
cave permits allow for only five participants per trip leader.
Groups much larger than six may require additional per-

---------- Page 19 ----------
sonnel-tracking methods. Sign-in/sign-out sheets can be
effective. Determining numbers by vehicle is valid only if
an expectation is voiced and followed that no one changes
vehicles.
Following this incident, Indiana University dis-
banded its 60-year-old caving club.


********** 17 September
Bill Clinton Pot, Tennessee
rockfall, injury and aid
Marion Smith (75), Terry McClanathan, and Shawn
Hogbin spent a Sunday exploring pits in Van Buren County
including Bill Clinton Pot, a 66-foot-deep pit. Hogbin as-
cended out first, and McClanathan ascended next while
Smith waited at the bottom. Although the bottom of the
pit is only 15 feet in diameter, the cavers felt there was no
concern for rockfall in this particular pit. McClanathan as-
cended about 40 feet when his foot brushed a small stalag-
mite on a ledge. The stalagmite was not firmly attached and
McClanathan shouted "ROCK!" as it began to fall. Before
Smith could react, the stalagmite struck him on the head.
McClanathan descended and found Smith with his
helmet still on, but Smith was bleeding from his left ear, he
was in great pain, and he felt dizzy. Hogbin left to summon
help while Smith and McClanathan waited at the bottom of
the pit. After a few hours, Smith was getting cold and decid-
ed he may be able to climb out. Most of the excess rope used
in rigging the pit was at the bottom of the pit, SO McCla-
nathan climbed out and rerigged it SO that Smith could be
lowered if he had difficulty ascending. Smith climbed out,
but negotiating the lip at the top of the pit exhausted him.
Other rescuers showed up at this point and carried him off
the mountain. Smith was transported to a local hospital and
then flown to Chattanooga. He was diagnosed with a lower
left temporal skull fracture and he spent several days in the
hospital.
1. Terry McClanathan, Incident Report, 6 November 2017.
Comments: Even caves with minimal rockfall dan-
ger carry the risk of a dropped pack or carabiner. Some pits
have no safety zone at the bottom. In these cases, it is some-
times better just to visit the fall zone one at a time, returning
to the safety zone at the top before the next caver enters.
In his report, McClanathan says, "What can I say?
Marion and I can claim over a century of experience be-
tween us in thousands of caves, some of which are among
the most challenging caves in the country. Was it just our
time? Treat the simplest cave with the same respect that
you would a difficult one, and be just as careful on your
multi-thousandth cave as you were on your first."


********** 6 October
Solution Rift, Tennessee
stranded, aid, no injury
At the annual TAG Fall Cave-In event, Kyle Lassiter
(26) asked several cavers for information on doing a pull-
down trip through Solution Rift. The next day, Lassiter and
four other cavers prepared for a five- to eight-hour trip in-
volving eight pits and several thousand feet of crawling. No
one on the trip had been to the cave before, but they all felt
confident with the trip details they received.
The group received permission from the landown-
er to enter the cave, and they were underground by 1:00
p.m. Eight hours later, they reached the last room of the
cave. They knew this was the final room from the pres-
ence of a concrete dam that was said to be only 100 feet
from the spring exit. The group could not find a way out of
this room, which contained an organic debris-filled sump.
Weather in Tennessee had been dry for several weeks, and
no one, including the landowner, had given any indication
that the spring entrance may be flooded. The group had not
checked this entrance themselves before entering the cave.
Lassiter's group decided to wait for help as they
could not retrace their steps, having pulled the ropes down
behind them. They were all wearing wetsuits, and they had
extra food and water, and one emergency blanket.
When cavers at the TAG Fall Cave-In noticed that
the group had not returned, they organized a rescue. Lo-
cal authorities were contacted as well, but cavers arrived on
scene first. Jason Hardy led rescuers to the upper entrance
to begin hard rigging the cave's pits. Kelly Smallwood led
a team to the lower spring entrance. Smallwood's team im-
mediately saw that two large beaver dams had flooded a
large portion of the valley, including the cave's lower en-
trance. The upper entrance rescue team was called to assist
and the two teams began working on breaching the bea-
ver dams. At 4:00 a.m., the cavers in the cave noticed water
levels receding and were able to make voice contact with
those outside. Thirty minutes later, they were able to exit
the cave.
1. Kyle Lassiter, Incident Report, 10 October 2017.
Comments: Any planned through trip-especially
a vertical pull-down through p-carries an extra degree
of stranding or entrapment risk over an out-and-back trip.
It is often prudent to examine the lower entrance before en-
tering the upper one. Some through-trip caves require pre-
rigging at the exit, or entering it to scout for obstacles like
log jams or ice plugs.
Rescuers work to access a caving group stranded by a flooded
entrance in Solution Rift. Photo by Kelly Smallwood.

---------- Page 20 ----------
After the event, Lassiter learned that beavers had
been known to cause flooding in the area, but there had
been no mention of this in the Tennessee Cave Survey's nar-
rative of Solution Rift. There is now.


********** 13 October
Bisaro Anima, British Columbia, Canada
other, injury, no aid
On the first day of a five-day expedition, six cav-
ers descended into Bisaro Anima. One 300-foot pit, called
The Black Watch, is rigged with multiple rebelays. After de-
scending this pitch, Christian Stenner (37) noticed pain in
his left wrist. The pain got worse and continued for the du-
ration of the expedition, but was managed with ibuprofen.
Stenner received medical attention six days after the injury.
The diagnosis was a sprain that required physical therapy
and a wrist brace for three weeks.
1. Christian Stenner, personal communication, 30 October 2017.
Comments: In the course of strenuous activity,
body parts can sometimes become strained or malfunction
for no apparent reason. Seek medical attention as soon as
possible after injury. Anti-inflammatory medication can
help with pain management and improved outcomes.


********** 16 November
Actun Tunichil Muknal, Belize
fatality, medical issue
An American tourist died while on a guided trip in
Actun Tunichil Muknal. Madhukar Jiggini (68) of California
was touring the cave with his wife when he collapsed. He
was rushed to a hospital where he was pronounced dead.
The cause of death was not reported.
1. Michelle Sutherland, "American doctor collapses and dies
while on tourist adventure," www.reporter.bz, 17 November
2017.
2. BBN staff, "American doctor dies while crossing the river at
ATM Cave site," www.breakingbelizenews.com 17 November
2017.


********** 24 November
Grunge Plunge Cave, Tennessee
exhaustion, aid, no injury
Four cavers entered Grunge Plunge Cave to sur-
vey and attempt a dome climb. One caver (22) was advised
against wearing a wetsuit but chose to do SO anyway, fear-
ing he would get cold while belaying the dome climber.
Grunge Plunge is a deep cave with over 40 rope drops. The
caver wearing the wetsuit eventually became overheated
and in time stopped sweating. After pushing leads at the
15th drop, he was noticeably dehydrated and exhausted. He
had also forgotten his food in a vehicle and had brought
only one quart of water. He and his partner started to exit
the cave and found a note along the way that the other two
cavers were already heading out.
At 1:00 a.m., they were moving slowly and had
made it only to the seventh drop. Approaching their out
time, the stronger caver decided to try to exit on his own,
leaving the exhausted caver to slowly keep making his way
toward the exit. Unfortunately, the already exhausted caver
got lost in the breakdown and stopped to take a nap. When
he did not emerge by 5:30 a.m., two of the original four
cavers went back in to find him. The exhausted caver was
located at 9:15 a.m., but he was too weak to move. After
some food and water, though, he was able to continue and
emerged at 12:30 p.m.
Local authorities and other cavers had been noti-
fied of the situation and put on standby by the morning of
25 November, but the patient emerged from the cave before
they were deployed.
1. Scott McCrea, Incident Report, 7 December 2017.
Comments: It is usually best to wear whatever the
cavers that know the cave tell you to wear. This caver was
warned not to wear a wetsuit and did SO anyway. Fortu-
nately, he was able to be revived with some food and water
and did not require evacuation.
A caver who is already exhausted and having diffi-
culty should not be left to travel alone. His stopping to take
a nap may have prevented a serious accident.


********** 28 November
Crevasse Cave, Nevada
difficulty on rope, no injury, no aid
An experienced female caver (mid-30s) was the first
in a group of seven to rappel into the 40-foot entrance pit of
Crevasse Cave. About 15 feet down, she called to her group
that her hair was caught in her rack. She was able to put her
upper ascender on the rope and stand in her foot loop, but
she was still unable to extricate her hair from her rack.
Another rope had already been rigged at the top as
an approach line, and although it didn't reach the bottom
of the pit, it was long enough for Gretchen Baker to rappel
down to assist. Baker used her cowstail to connect into her
friend's maillon and help her friend onto a narrow ledge.
With the entangled caver clipped into Baker's cowstail, and
with her upper ascender still on rope, it was safe for Baker
to help remove her friend's rack and untangle her hair. Af-
ter putting her rack back on the rope, the caver was able to
complete her descent without further incident.
1. Gretchen Baker, Incident Report, 29 November 2017.
2. Gretchen Baker, e-mail communication, 13 December 2017.
Comments: Even without a second rope, this inci-
dent would have been quickly remedied. The first rope had
been rigged with a locked-off Munter hitch with the extra
rope length left at the top, SO the caver could have been low-
ered to the ground. At the time, the second rope was deter-
mined to be the quicker solution. Rigging a mainline with
a Munter hitch is often referred to as contingency rigging.
For more information on contingency rigging, see Gretch-
en Baker's feature article in the last edition (2015-2016) of
American Caving Accidents.

---------- Page 21 ----------


********** 1 December
Valhalla Cave, Alabama
equipment problem, aid, no injury
On 1 December, a group of cavers from Indiana
drove to Alabama for three days of camping and caving.
After visiting one popular pit, they drove to Valhalla Cave.
They had received a permit from the Southeastern Cave
Conservancy, Inc. for camping and caving on the property.
They arrived at the campsite after dark and found another
vehicle already parked there. The vehicle did not show any
evidence it belonged to a caver, such as NSS or bat stickers,
SO the cavers assumed it belonged to a hunter who would
be returning at any time.
The next morning the vehicle was still there. The
cavers took their time preparing and eating breakfast and
organizing their gear. The first cavers arrived at the en-
trance pit at 11:30 a.m. and were surprised to see two ropes
rigged to a tree, going down into the cave. One rope was a
black 7-mm dynamic cord, the other was what appeared to
be an old, approximately 2-inch-thick, white sailing rope.
Joe Kinder yelled down into the pit, "Is there any-
one down there?"
A response, "Yes!"
"Are you Okay?"
"Yes!"
"Are you attached to either of the ropes?"
"No!"
The cavers then told the person below to stand
clear of the rockfall zone SO that they could lower another
rope. Once this rope was rigged, Elliot Stahl rappelled into
the cave, taking an extra set of vertical gear with him. The
man he found at the bottom, Jonathan Brown (early 20s),
appeared to be unhurt, but Stahl requested that Melissa
Fitzpatrick join him to confirm that Brown was well. Stahl
also requested she bring down a helmet for Brown. While
Fitzpatrick got ready to descend, Stahl suggested that the
cavers up top pull up the black rope. Once the rope was
pulled up, the cavers saw that two Jumars were attached to
the rope and one of Brown's shoes was still in a foot loop.
Cavers arrived at Valhalla Cave on 1 December 2017 to find the 227-foot-
deep entrance pit rigged with an old sailing rope and a 7-mm accessory
cord. Photo by Joe Kinder.
Joe Kinder and Bart Bridge rig access and SRT ropes in order to assist
a man stranded in Valhalla Cave. Photo courtesy of Joe Kinder.
Fitzpatrick took the shoe, food, water, and the extra helmet
with her into the cave.
While Stahl and Fitzpatrick helped Brown put on
vertical gear and instructed him on how to ascend with it,
the other cavers rigged a second rope and began to pull up
the sailing rope. The sailing rope was "extremely heavy"
and required the whole team to assist. Stahl then ascend-
ed one of the ropes next to Brown who ascended the other
rope. They reached the surface at 12:55 p.m.
Through questioning, the cavers learned that Brown
had entered Valhalla Cave on 1 December in order to make
a video to audition for the American Ninja Warrior television
show. He had planned to rappel on the black cord using an
ATC belay device, then climb out hand-over-hand on the
sailing rope. Brown's first error was that he thought he was
entering Neversink, which is about 150 feet deep. His black
cord was 300 feet long but the sailing rope was only 150 feet
long; Valhalla's entrance pit is 227 feet deep.
In his report, Stahl says, "Once Brown saw the
white line was short, he rappelled to the floor and attempted
to climb up 'Texas' style on the black line until he reached
the white rope. He got some distance off the ground and
his knot to his upper ascender slipped or came untied and
he went into a heel hang. He managed to get back down to
the bottom. He then belayed himself up the black line with
the ATC while free climbing to a ledge 50 feet up. There he
spent the night, realizing he still could not reach the white
rope. The next morning, he rappelled down the black line
and drank water from the falls at the bottom slope of the pit.
He had no food with him."
1. Joe Kinder and Elliot Stahl, Incident Report, 4 December 2017.
2. Joe Kinder, e-mail communication, 7 December 2017.
Comments: The cavers enlightened Brown on
proper caving equipment and techniques, then escorted
him off the property.

---------- Page 22 ----------
When cavers removed the 7-mm accessory cord from the Valhalla Cave
entrance pit, they found two Jumars and a shoe attached to the cord.
Photo courtesy of Joe Kinder.


********** 9 December
Pentagon Pit, Missouri
other, no injury, no aid
Chad McCain, Alex Litsch, and Cody Brooks
planned a day of surveying and bolt climbing in Pentagon
Pit. They rigged the entrance pit the way they had on pre-
vious trips, by first tying to a large oak tree located 30 feet
away from the pit. At the lip of the pit stood an 8-inch-diam-
eter hickory tree. It had died earlier that year but still had
its bark and looked solid. They girth-hitched two Spectra
slings about 5 feet above the lip of the pit on the hickory
tree. A butterfly knot in the mainline was clipped into the
slings. This gave them an approach line to the pit with a rig
point high enough that they could rappel or ascend right
past the lip. Slack remained in the mainline between the
two trees to make transitioning from the climbing rope to
the traverse line easier.
At the end of the trip, McCain ascended first. Thirty
feet up, he heard a loud pop, followed by movement in the
rope. He then dropped about 6 feet and portions of a tree
top came crashing down the pit. McCain continued to climb
slowly. When he was within 20 feet of the top, he could see
the hickory tree lying across the pit with the butterfly rig
point 6 feet out from the edge. The section of rope between
the two trees was now "as tight as a guitar string." He
"crossed this new obstacle" and made it out of the pit. He
pulled up enough rope to re-rig a tensionless hitch around
the oak tree and Litsch and Brooks ascended out. McCain
concludes his report, "We decided the best course of action
was to kick the tree into the pit, as it was inevitable that it
was going in. A few kicks and the tree fell in and wedged
itself into the main part of the pit, giving us a new obstacle
to work around on the next trip."
1. Chad McCain, "Pentagon Pit, survey #2," 24 December 2017.
Comments: As tempting as it may be to keep using
favored rigging trees after they have died, the reality is that
they each come with a unique expiration date that is not
marked.
Caver's Cathedral, by Jacob Lieber, received a Merit Award in the
2019 Photo Salon.

---------- Page 23 ----------
2017 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents


********** 8 January
Eagles Nest, Florida
fatality, drowning
Charles Odom (55) died 8 January 2017 while div-
ing with friends at the Eagles Nest cave in Weeki Wachee
near Tampa, Florida. Odom indicated he was having trouble
while ascending to the first of several decompression stops
following a deep dive in the cave. He was using a Hollis
Prism rebreather during the dive.
Odom was a relatively new diver at the time of this
incident. He started his beginning open-water training with
the owner of EZ Scuba Diving in Tampa in 2015. Much (and
probably most) of his training was done in Eagles Nest. He
was certified as a cavern diver by his instructor in Eagles
Nest. He was not successful in a later attempt to get higher
cave certification through another instructor.
Odom was one of four divers in Eagles Nest, but
one of them had an equipment problem at the start and had
to abandon the dive. The remaining divers completed the
deep portion of the dive and began their ascent to the first
decompression stop, which would have been in the area of
the narrow chimney entrance. During the ascent, Odom was
heard to make a choking noise while using his rebreather.
He signaled a problem and switched to his backup open-
circuit regulator. He soon lost consciousness during the first
decompression stop, at which point his companions tried to
help by holding his regulator in his mouth.
The remaining divers at first tried to bring him up
with them, but at their 40-foot decompression stop they sent
him to the surface SO that first aid could be attempted there
while they completed their required decompression stops.
At the surface, the diver who had aborted the dive earli-
er saw Odom float to the surface and attempted first aid.
Odom was noted to be cold and frothing at the mouth, with
no sign of a pulse. Medical help arrived and pronounced
him dead at the scene.
The medical examiner ruled that he had died from
drowning, which is typical of most scuba fatalities since the
triggering event is often hard to identify. The medical exam-
iner identified atherosclerosis and obesity as contributing
factors, but neither condition on their own would lead to
the drowning. Odom likely had a medical event that led to
his unconsciousness and subsequent drowning, but such an
event is difficult to diagnose afterward. An examination of
his rebreather showed that it was working properly.
1. Times staff, "Man dies at treacherous Eagles Nest cave diving
site in Weeki Wachee," www.tampabay.com, 9 January 2017.
2. Associated Press, "Man dies while cave diving in Florida,"
www.orlandosentinel.com, 9 January 2017.
3. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 29 July
2019.
Comments: Eagles Nest is a deep and complicated
cave system. Its upper structure resembles an hourglass:
the upper basin has a narrow chimney leading down to a
large room (the Ballroom), with depths well beyond normal
recreational scuba. From the Ballroom, passages extend to
great distances and depths. Diving in this cave is consid-
ered to be appropriate only for highly trained and experi-
enced cave divers. The National Speleological Society-Cave
Diving Section (NSS-CDS) published a statement that there
is no true cavern zone at Eagles Nest, signifying that train-
ing should not take place there and that anyone entering
should be cave-dive certified. Odom did most of his train-
ing and certification testing at Eagles Nest. Following inves-
tigations, his instructor's certifications were stripped for not
following protocols in Odom's training.


********** 24 September
Cannonball Cave, Missouri
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
After attending an NSS Cave Diving Section work-
shop in Missouri, cave diver Forrest Wilson (72) and others
planned a trip to dive Cannonball Cave. In a report, Wilson
describes a problem he encountered:
"Ihad stuck my gloves in a pocket, because the lake
is warm, SO you don't need them until getting into the cave.
I couldn't get them out when I got to the cave, SO I dove
bare-handed. Good thing too! I had a very strange problem.
I was swimming along on a Sidekick rebreather with a cus-
tom side-mount mouthpiece. I took a breath, but it was just
water. I noticed the DSV (dive surface valve) floating away,
but I still had the mouthpiece in my mouth. I grabbed a
bailout regulator, but I wasn't getting any air. I grabbed the
other bailout regulator, still no air. I tried the purge button,
and the regulator was working fine. I finally tried breathing
while purging, and realized I was getting a little, but very
little air. I tried coughing then breathing, and it took several
attempts to get my breathing back to normal. I suspect if I
had my gloves on, this all would have been a lot harder to
do."
Medical doctor, and fellow cave diver Dr. Andy


********** Pitkin, offered an explanation to Wilson for his incident: "It
was your glottis, aka laryngeal inlet, aka vocal cords which
were shut. The phenomenon is called laryngospasm, and
most of us have experienced a mild form of it while eat-
ing when we accidentally inhale a piece of food and cough
profusely. When that happens, you cannot talk for a few
minutes, which is due to the residual spasm in the vocal
cords. That is a minor version of what you experienced, and
it can be severe enough to completely block the airway for
several minutes in certain circumstances. It is triggered by
foreign material (water, food, etc.) on the vocal cords and in
the upper trachea, and it is the traditional explanation for
the phenomenon of dry drowning, where the victim does
not have any water in their lungs. When it happens during
anesthesia (typically in children during emergence) the first
line of treatment is to apply positive airway pressure which
is essentially what you did with the purge button."

---------- Page 24 ----------
1. Forrest Wilson, e-mail communication, 27 February 2018.
Comments: Wilson reports that he had failed to
properly tighten the zip-tie that holds the mouthpiece to the
DSV. When he started to inhale, he inhaled water, trigger-
ing the laryngospasm.
2017 Caving-Related Accidents and Incidents


********** 29 May
unnamed cave, Arizona
fatality, drowning
A Utah man drowned when he tried swimming
under a waterfall in order to enter a cave. A small cave is
located behind Beaver Falls on the Havasupai Reservation.
Mark Magelby (36) and his friends attempted diving under
the waterfall to reach the cave. When he did not make it,
Magelby's friend dove into the water to look for him but
could not find him. Magelby's body was later recovered by
authorities.
1. Associated Press, "Orem man drowns trying to enter cave
located behind waterfall," www.heraldextra.com 30 May 2017.
Comments: Even the shortest-distance free sump
dive must be evaluated with the utmost caution. Cave-div-
ing equipment and technique is needed to safely negotiate
any underwater passage besides the shortest duck-unders.


********** 9 October
unspecified sinkhole, Missouri
fell into sinkhole, injury and aid
When an elderly, wheelchair-bound woman went
missing from her nursing home, staff began a search of the
grounds. They found her in the bottom of a sinkhole behind
the facility. The local fire department and ambulance ser-
vice were able to get her out and take her to a hospital for
treatment of undisclosed injuries.
1. Robert Cox, "Nursing home patient rescued from sinkhole,"
Republic-Monitor, Volume 138, Issue 80, Page 1, 12 October 2017.


********** 31 December
unspecified cave, Georgia
dog fatality
A family took their dog hunting on New Year's
Eve in the Chattahoochee National Forest. At some point,
the dog entered a cave and became stuck. The family tried
to retrieve their dog but was unsuccessful. On 2 January,
the family requested help from the Gilmer County Fire
and Rescue Department. When the agency was unsuccess-
ful, Georgia Department of Natural Resources was asked
to help. Unfortunately, the dog died before it could be res-
cued.
1. Staff, "Dog trapped in cave for days dies despite several rescue
attempts," www.wsbradio.com, 3 January 2018.
2. Kristal Dixon, "Hunting dog dies after getting trapped in cave
in north Georgia," www.patch.com, 4 January 2018.
Comments: Previous issues of American Caving
Accidents contain many reports of dogs being rescued
days, even weeks, after being stranded in a cave. This is our
first report of a dog dying during a rescue attempt.
Steve Hudson Award
for Service to Cave Rescue
Steve Hudson (NSS 11444 RL,FE,OS) was a
founder of the National Cave Rescue Commission
(NCRC) in the late 1970s and supported it through
the next four decades. He served as one of its first
instructors, as the Southeastern Region Coordinator,
as the National Coordinator, and as the Training
Coordinator. Hudson owned and operated Pigeon
Mountain Industries (PMI) and was an internationally
acknowledged expert on rope and rope rescue. He
used his experience to raise standards and practices
in industrial rope access as well. He was a founder of
the Society of Professional Rope Access Technicians
(SPRAT) and an author of High Angle Rescue Techniques.
Hudson served as Deputy Director of Emergency
Services for Walker County, Georgia, and was a
recipient of its Distinguished Service Award. He
was also the recipient of the International Technical
Rescue's Lifetime Achievement Award. Hudson
donated countless hours to teaching rescue techniques
to make cavers safer. In recognition of his lifetime of
service, the National Speleological Society created the
Steve Hudson Award for Service to Cave Rescue.
Steve Hudson Award for Service
to Cave Rescue recipients:
2016-Diane Cousineau
2017-Harold & Nancy Chrimes
2018-Don Paquette
2019- -Rod Dennison

---------- Page 25 ----------
2018 Caving Accidents and Incidents


********** 1 January
Bisaro Anima, British Columbia, Canada
other, injury, no aid
A team of nine cavers was moving gear deep into
Bisaro Anima to support a dive at the terminal sump. On
the second day underground, Christian Stenner (37) was
shuttling a bag containing a dive cylinder in a crawling
passage below Camp 1. While shifting the bag forward us-
ing his right hand, a tank valve that was protruding from
the top of the bag hit Stenner directly on his left-hand ring
finger, causing severe pain. Stenner continued to cave for
the expedition, guarding his left hand and carrying lighter
bags. The finger bruised and swelled noticeably, but it was
kept without a splint in order to maintain some dexterity.
First aid was limited to ibuprofen for pain management.
After emerging from the cave three days later,
Stenner visited a doctor on the fourth day after the incident.
An X-ray confirmed that the finger was broken. The finger
was splinted for four weeks.
1. Christian Stenner, personal communication, 12 January 2018.
Comments: On remote expeditions, it can be diffi-
cult to decide whether to leave because of a minor injury or
illness. The benefit of early care must be balanced with the
risk of traveling in small groups and reducing the numbers
of the overall expedition team. In some cases, there may be
no real option to leave early. In general, it is better to seek
definitive medical care earlier rather than later. Injuries
that seem minor at the time can progress into more serious
conditions if not treated promptly.


********** 7 January
Little Brush Creek Cave, Utah
caver fall, injury and aid
Four friends from California entered Little Brush
Creek Cave after reading about the cave on the Internet.
The group had no caving experience, and their only gear
was small headlamps. The three men and one woman
down-climbed one pit. When they reached a second pit,
one of the men (24) was willing to attempt to explore it. At
an unknown distance down the 80-foot-deep pit, the man
slipped and fell; he sustained multiple severe injuries to his
arms, legs, and face.
Hearing their friend fall and shout in pain terrified
the other three explorers and they were afraid to attempt
climbing down to him or back up the pit they had already
descended. Eventually, realizing that no one knew where
they were and help would not be coming, one of the men
determined that he would get himself out of the cave and
call for help. He was successful, and he called 911 shortly
after 9:00 p.m.
The agencies that responded had little to no cave-
rescue experience, and they requested the assistance of local
After being extricated from Little Brush Creek Cave, the patient was
hauled up two snow-covered slopes. Photo by Eric Richards.
cavers through the NCRC Rocky Mountain Region callout
system. Cavers with rescue experience began arriving early
the next morning, and more were put on standby.
The uninjured man and woman were hauled up the
pit while other rescuers attended to the injured man. The
patient was hauled up two pits and placed in a Stokes lit-
ter. This litter was then hauled through and out of the cave
and reached the surface around 10:00 a.m. Once outside
the cave, the patient was hauled up two vertical slopes to
an ambulance waiting on the road. The ambulance drove
a short distance and transferred the patient to a helicopter.
Sixteen hours after his fall, the man was flown to a Salt Lake
City hospital.
Rescuers carry an injured man through Little Brush Creek Cave. Note
the ice stalagmites. Photo by Bonny Armstrong.

---------- Page 26 ----------
1. Bonny Armstrong, Incident Report, 8 January 2018.
2. Simone Francis, "California man rescued after 50-foot fall in
cave," www.good4utah.com, 9 January 2018.
Comments: The young adults said they had met in a
rehabilitation center. After completing their programs, they
decided to go on adventures together to help support each
other in recovery. They found out about Little Brush Creek
Cave early on in their travels together. The cave is located
at 8,000 feet elevation and has a temperature in the high 30s.
The group survived the night underground in these condi-
tions wearing only jeans and other cotton clothing.


********** 21 January
Thunder Hole Cave, Alabama
lost control on rappel, injury and aid
Six students from the Georgia Institute of Technolo-
gy were on a recreational trip in Thunder Hole Cave. While
rappelling a 30-foot-deep pit, a female student's rack be-
came stuck at the lip. When the rack dislodged, she lost con-
trol of her rappel and could not regain control before hitting
the ground. Several rescue agencies were alerted, but the
woman and her group were able to self-rescue. The woman
was transported to the hospital where she was treated for
injuries to her lower leg.
1. Associated Press, "Woman rescued from cave in Jackson
County, Ala," www.timesfreepress.com, 21 January 2018.
2. Anonymous, personal communication, 18 September 2019.
Comments: The American Caving Accidents com-
mittee has had difficulty obtaining information about this
incident, but a lack of experience may have been a contrib-
uting factor.


********** 4 February
Howards Waterfall Cave, Georgia
medical issue, no injury, no aid
Seven cavers participated in an easy, horizontal
trip to Howards Waterfall Cave. During a rest break, a
40-year-old man began experiencing pressure in his chest
along with an irregular heartbeat, general weakness, and
profuse sweating. The trip leader, Sam Moore, was notified,
and Moore began formulating a plan, fearing these were the
symptoms of a heart attack.
The patient had the most medical experience of
anyone in the group, SO Moore discussed with him what
should be done in case his condition worsened, includ-
ing CPR instructions and what to tell emergency services.
Moore determined that the group should begin assisting
the patient out of the cave immediately. The two fastest
cavers were on alert to exit the cave quickly and call 911 if
necessary.
The group made it out of the cave in less than half
an hour and drove the patient to a hospital. The emergency
room visit did not reveal any specific cause for the patient's
symptoms.
1. Sam Moore, Incident Report, 7 February 2018.
Comments: In his report, Moore wrote, "Taking the
time to formulate a plan and explaining that plan to the team
was key in keeping everyone calm. Originally, the patient
insisted that he work with a single other team member to
exit the cave. However, the team leader informed the team
that this is now a rescue situation, and that everyone will
need to help to maximize the chance of success. Keeping a
slow, steady pace was key to exiting the cave without add-
ing undue risk to the patient. Keeping the patient's spouse
by his side kept both of them calm, while everyone know-
ing that we could send two fast, capable team members out
quickly to call for emergency services allowed everyone to
relax and focus on moving the patient forward in a timely,
deliberate manner."


********** 12 February
Arch Cave, British Columbia, Canada
other, aid, no injury
At 6:30 p.m., Alberta-British Columbia Cave Rescue
received a report that a caving party of two was 30 minutes
overdue from their check-in time for a trip into Arch Cave,
Northern Vancouver Island. Local Royal Canadian Mount-
ed Police were notified and gave the go-ahead for the cave
rescue group to organize an initial response team (IRT) to
investigate for an overdue caving party. The overdue party
checked in at 7:15 p.m., just as the IRT was preparing to
leave Port MacNeil, and the operation stood down.
1. Doug Munroe, Incident Report, 14 February 2018.
Comments: The cavers thought their callout time
was later and were simply taking their time.


********** 17 February
Wind Cave, Pennsylvania
stuck, aid, no injury
Wind Cave in Martic Township, Pennsylvania, is a
popular tectonic cave for cavers and the public. It is also
known as Cold Cave, SO named for the strong breezes blow-
ing between entrances that make it colder than most caves
in the state.
On 17 February, a group of 16 Boy Scouts and adults
made it about 350 feet into the cave when one teenage boy
(15) slipped and fell into a narrow crevice. The group tried
for two hours to free him before calling 911 at 5:30 p.m.
The Rawlinsville Fire Department arrived and
placed warming pads on the teen to keep him warm. Some
rock had to be chiseled away until the teen could be extri-
cated from his position around midnight. The teen was car-
ried in a Stokes litter through the woods to a waiting physi-
cian and ambulance. Although he did not appear to have
any injuries, he was taken to a hospital for a full evaluation.
More than 60 people were involved in the rescue.
1. Tim Stuhldreher, "Teen boy rescued from wind caves in Martic
Township late Saturday night," www.lancasteronline.com, 17
February 2018.

---------- Page 27 ----------
2. Steve Marroni, "Teen trapped in cave freed," www.pennlive.
com, 18 February 2018.
Comments: Crack and crevice entrapments are
serious situations. Because the entrapped individual is in
direct contact with rock and losing heat by conduction, hy-
pothermia becomes a real concern. In this incident, the res-
cue team warmed the patient and then began to move him
after some cave modifications. In most crack and crevice
rescues, the general idea is to capture each small bit of prog-
ress as you go. This can be accomplished with rope systems,
chockstones or cribbing, or by placing rescuers beneath the
patient.


********** 24 February
17 Mile Cave, Idaho
bad air, injury and aid
A large group of Boy Scouts and their leaders
started a campfire in 17 Mile Cave. The fire was reported to
the Idaho Falls Fire Department, which responded at 2:40
a.m. Thirteen Boy Scouts and five leaders needed assistance
evacuating the cave. Waiting ambulances treated some in-
dividuals for smoke inhalation, but no one required hospi-
talization.
1. Journal staff, "13 Boy Scouts evacuated from East Idaho cave,"
www.idahostatejournal.com, 24 February 2018.
Comments: Building a fire in a cave is generally a
bad idea. Fires mar the natural character of the cave and
have led to many incidents such as this one. In some cases,
fires in caves have consumed the available oxygen or cre-
ated carbon monoxide and have led to fatalities.


********** 2 March
Raccoon Mountain Caverns, Tennessee
other, injury and aid
A man touring Raccoon Mountain Caverns twisted
his ankle and needed assistance exiting the cave. Chatta-
nooga firefighters carried the man in a Stokes litter until
there was enough room for him to walk with assistance. It
took nearly three hours to help him out of the cave and once
out, he declined transport to a hospital.
1. Staff, "Chattanooga firefighters rescue man from cave," www.
timesfreepress.com, 2 March 2018.


********** 8 March
Robber Baron Cave, Texas
stuck, aid, no injury
An 18-year-old female student from Robert E. Lee
High School became stuck in Robber Baron Cave during a
school field trip. The students were exploring small crawl-
ways and narrow passages when the young woman was
encouraged by others to try to squeeze into a crack in the
floor. Unfortunately, she soon became wedged. Others in
her group tried unsuccessfully to help her out, but they
eventually called authorities for assistance. The San Anto-
nio Fire Department responded along with its Technical
Rescue Unit. Rescuers took more than nine hours to free the
young woman.
1. Elizabeth Ruiz, "Crews rescue teen trapped in cave near Alamo
Heights," www.ktsa.com, 9 March 2018.
2. Sarah Duran, "High school student resting at home after
rescue at Robber Baron Cave," www.spectrumlocalnews.com, 9
March 2018.
3. Geary Schindel, e-mail communication, 1 May 2018.
Comments: This is yet another incident highlight-
ing the serious nature of crack and crevice entrapment.


********** 8 March
Pettyjohns Cave, Georgia
caver fall, injury and aid
A group of 19 people entered Pettyjohns Cave to
explore the stream passage and Bridge Room. One of the
participants, a man in his 20s, slipped and fell, injuring his
right knee at the Slippery Slope just past an area called the
Pancake Squeeze. The Walker County Cave and Cliff Team
was first on the scene. Members of the Georgia DNR NW
Region Cave and High Angle Team were conducting train-
ing in the area that day and responded as well.
The patient was located and medically assessed.
He was 6 feet, 5 inches tall and weighed approximately 235
pounds. He complained of severe pain in his right knee.
Rescuers decided to administer pain relief medication and
help the patient to move slowly out of the cave with assis-
tance from rescuers. Once the patient reached the bottom of
a series of short climbs, he was placed in a SKED litter and
vertically hauled out of that section of the cave. Two areas
were rigged-both approximately 50 feet in length. The pa-
tient was out of the cave approximately three hours from
when rescuers arrived on scene and five hours after the in-
jury occurred. The patient was transported to Erlanger Hos-
pital in Chattanooga where he was treated for his injuries.
He is reportedly doing well and is back at work.
1. John Maddox, Incident Report, 19 March 2019.
Comments: Pettyjohns Cave has been the scene of
many rescues and mock rescues. Local rescue teams are
well-practiced in evacuating patients from this cave.


********** 13 March
Sótano de los Enríquez, Coahuila, Mexico
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
Five cavers participated in an expedition to Sótano
de los Enríquez in March 2018. Shortly before the expedi-
tion, one female caver (25) ordered a new micro rack from
SMC that arrived disassembled. She assembled the rack and
hand-tightened the nylon lock nuts on the end of the rack.
In the cave, she descended several pitches that in-
cluded four rebelays and three redirects and ended at a long
gentle slope. Switching to a second rope, she descended a
15-foot and then a 150-foot pitch. At the bottom, she noticed
an unusual shiny object on the cave floor. As she bent down

---------- Page 28 ----------
to
pick it up, the bars slipped off her rack and fell to the
floor. The object was a nut from her rack. The second nut
was never found among the scree in the pit. The next day
she returned and used a Munter hitch to make the same
descents.
1. Ken Demarest, Incident Report, 19 March 2018.
Comments: This incident could have had a tragic
ending. When unsure about new vertical gear or setting up
a new device, the manufacturer is the best source of infor-
mation. SMC recommends tightening the nylon hex nuts
with a wrench. At the very least, consult other experienced
cavers for their advice and a double check before using the
equipment.


********** 1 April
Island Ford Cave, Virginia
lost, aid, no injury
On Easter Sunday 2018, Ed Swepston and Mystik
Miller were the only members of the Greenbrier Grotto
who showed up for a planned trip to Island Ford Cave, a
1,500-foot-long cave in Alleghany County, Virginia. In the
cave, Swepston and Miller heard people shouting for help.
They continued on to find a group of five people in a room
near the end of the cave. This room is 700 feet from the en-
trance and near the cave's terminal sump. They had been
sitting in the room for three hours unsure of the way out.
The group had helmets (some had bike helmets) but two of
them were out of light.
Three routes lead from the room they were in to
the terminal sump, which had confused the group. In one
attempt to find the exit, the group had traveled in the cor-
rect direction, but they convinced themselves it was the
wrong way and turned around, going back to "their room."
Swepston and Miller led them out of the cave.
When they were all out, the group repeatedly
thanked Swepston and Miller and offered to buy them sup-
per and beer. Swepston said, "They were really nice peo-
ple."
1. George Dasher, "A Cave Rescue," The West Virginia Caver,
Volume 36, Number 3, page 14, June 2018.
Comments: You never know when your cave trip
might turn into a rescue.


********** 9 April
Sistema Huautla, Oaxaca, Mexico
flooding, no injury, no aid
Five cavers participated in a multi-day survey trip
in the La Grieta section of Sistema Huautla. On the second
day underground (9 April), Katie Graham and Chase Var-
ner pushed leads in an area known as The Fracture of the
Deep. They were returning to camp when they noticed that
a creek, which they had rock-hopped across earlier, was
now a raging, muddy river. Struggling to keep their foot-
ing and not be washed down-stream took considerable ef-
fort, but they eventually made it back to camp, where they
joined the rest of their team.
On the third day, the team altered its objectives, as
some passages were flooded. In camp, the team was already
low on food. They had planned for additional cavers to be
resupplying them, but those supplies had not come. By
day four, the team was surviving on single power bars for
breakfast and dinner.
On day five, Graham and Elliot Guerra-Blackmer
attempted to exit the cave as originally planned. As they
traveled toward the entrance, they encountered an unex-
pected sump. At first, they were confused as to how they
had gotten turned around. They then realized that they
were in the right place, but the passage was flooded.
They returned to camp to find that the rest of the
team was still out exploring. Rations were still low, SO they
ate peanuts for dinner and tried to sleep. The rest of the
team returned to camp early in the morning.
On day six, Graham and Guerra-Blackmer made
another push for the entrance. The passages were still
flooded, but there was just enough airspace that if they held
their helmets out in front of them, they could keep their
noses above water. Eventually the passage narrowed and
they reached another sump. Dreading the thought of going
back to camp yet again, Graham decided to dive under the
water to see if it would open up just beyond. Her first at-
tempt was unsuccessful. However, when she tried a second
time, she surfaced into large passage that she recognized.
Graham and Guerra-Blackmer exited the cave on 13 April;
the other three cavers exited the next day.
1. Andrew Bisharat, "One of the deepest caves in the world is
even bigger than we thought," www.nationalgeographic.com, 7
June 2018.
2. Kathleen Graham, e-mail communication, 9 October 2018.
Comments: This incident highlights the importance
of having a bit more food on hand than you are planning to
need.


********** 5 May
Chontalcoatlán, Guerrero, Mexico
2 fatalities, drowning
Nineteen visitors wearing life jackets and two
guides were touring Chontalcoatlán in Cacahuamilpa Na-
tional Park. Reports state that two sisters (16 and 19) from
the state of Mexico were swept away by the current and
drowned. Their bodies were recovered the next day.
1. "Mueren dos hermanas en las Grutas de Cacahuamilpa," nfl.
com.mxwww.zocalo.com.mx, 5 May 2018.

---------- Page 29 ----------


********** 23 June
Convention Cave, Massachusetts
stuck, injury and aid
An unidentified man and his friend were "checking
out" a cave when he slipped while leaning forward in the
entrance. He pitched forward and became wedged between
boulders in a head-down position. It took about two hours
for local firefighters and a technical rescue team to free him.
He suffered lacerations to his back and head.
Despite there being numerous caves in the area, the
fire chief said that this is the first cave rescue he could re-
member in his 37 years of being with the department.
1. Andy McKeever, "Man rescued after getting stuck in
Lanesborough Cave," www.iberkshires.com, 25 June 2018.
2. Chuck Porter, e-mail communication, 22 October 2018.
Comments: The 200-foot-long marble cave was
originally discovered during the 1979 NSS Convention in
Pittsfield. It is described in an article in the Spring 1981
Northeastern Caver.
Rescuers work to free a man stuck in Convention
Cave. Photo courtesy of the Lanesborough Fire
Department.


********** 10 July
Lava River Cave, Arizona
caver fall, injury and aid
A 44-year-old man fell and injured his ankle while
exploring near the back of Lava River Cave, a 3/4-mile-long
lava tube. Multiple agencies responded, and more than 20
rescuers helped carry the man out of the cave.
1. Ponderosa Fire District, Facebook, 11 July 2018.
Comments: Lava River Cave is heavily visited, of-
ten by underprepared explorers. A caver with kneepads
and gloves would likely be able to crawl out of this lava
tube, even with an injured ankle.


********** 14 July
Cedar Knob Cave, Virginia
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
While ascending rope in the Cedar Knob Cave en-
trance pit, Mark Hodge's (55) Singing Rock Digger harness
separated where the right leg loop attaches to the harness.
He was 20 feet up the tight, 34-foot pit when he suddenly
dropped about 4 inches. He checked his upper ascender
and Croll and didn't immediately see what the problem
was. Using rebar that had been installed in the pit while
it was being dug open, Hodge was able to climb out. He
checked the rigging and decided to rappel back down the
pit. As soon as he weighted the rope again, he realized that
there was a problem with his harness.
Hodge reported that he had been using the harness
for six years and had worn it on about 3,500 trips in this pit
(the cave is on Hodge's property and has been an extensive
dig project). Although he inspected the harness regularly,
After thousands of trips in Cedar Knob Cave, Mark Hodge's six-year-
old seat harness failed while he was on rope. Photo by Mark Hodge.
Mark Hodge in Cedar Knob Cave at the location where his seat harness
failed. He was able to use the rebar rungs to climb to safety. Photo
courtesy of Mark Hodge.

---------- Page 30 ----------
the wear point was "partially hidden by those yellow buck-
le cover thingies."
1. Mark Hodge, Incident Report, 18 July 2018.
Comments: The "yellow buckle cover thingies" on
this harness are nylon tabs that fit over the buckled part of
the leg strap. Ironically, they are meant to prevent wear on
the harness webbing.


********** 14 July
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave, Wyoming
lost, aid, no injury
Three friends set out to do a pulldown through
trip from Fossil Mountain Ice Cave to Wind Cave. They
had enough information about the cave to know that they
needed to rig a rope for ascending at the lower entrance.
However, after the last rappel, they became lost and were
unable to find the rope they had rigged.
One of the men had left word with his wife to call
for help if she hadn't heard from him by 11:00 p.m. A search
and rescue operation was initiated the next morning, and
rescuers found the men just as they were exiting the cave.
After stopping around midnight to rest and eat, the men
had continued looking for the way out until they were at
last successful.
1. Emily Mieure, "Men spend 24 hours in Darby Canyon caves,"
www.jhnewsandguide.com 18 July 2018.
Comments: Famous in the pages of American Cav-
ing Accidents is the Fossil Mountain Ice Cave-Wind Cave
through trip. This time, the team knew enough to prepare
the exit, but then they got lost and couldn't find it. They at
least knew enough to set up a surface watch, and in the end
they were resourceful enough to find the exit on their own.


********** 18 July
Eagles Nest, Florida
fatality, drowning
Said Marjane (20), an international student from
Morocco, died at the Eagles Nest cave in Weeki Wachee
Springs near Tampa, Florida. Eagles Nest is a deep and
complicated underwater cave system. Its upper structure
resembles an hourglass: the upper basin has a narrow chim-
ney leading down to a large room called the Ballroom, with
depths well beyond normal recreational scuba. The bot-
tom of the chimney and the top of the Ballroom is about
70 feet deep. From the Ballroom, passages extend to great
distances and even greater depths. Diving in this cave is
considered to be appropriate for only highly trained and
experienced cave divers.
Marjane and friends went to Eagles Nest for a freed-
living experience. Freediving is an activity in which divers
descend below the water's surface without the use of scuba
tanks or any other air source other than their ability to hold
their breath. Marjane and friends arrived at Eagles Nest in
the afternoon, and after completing several freedives over
the next few hours, Marjane told friends that he was going
to attempt a new personal best for depth.
Marjane and another diver, Jacob Fernandez, de-
scended through the chimney and into the Ballroom. Fer-
nandez turned his dive around at 80 feet and returned to the
surface through the chimney. The depth Marjane reached is
not known. He did not make it back to the surface, and div-
ers recovered his body in the cave the next day.
1. Ryan Gillespie, "Body of missing diver found at Eagles Nest in
Hernando County, called 'Mount Everest' of underwater," www.
orlandosentinel.com, 19 July 2018.
2. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 31 July 2019.
Comments: Since cave-diving equipment was not
used, this incident is not considered a cave-diving incident.


********** 1 August
Gargantua Cave, British Columbia, Canada
other, aid, no injury
Two cavers were reported overdue from a trip in
Gargantua Cave. Their callout time was 8:00 p.m., but by
7:00 a.m. the next day, they had not been heard from. Their
vehicle was located at the trailhead but there was no other
sign. An initial response team was dispatched to the cave.
The cavers were found outside the cave on the trail with no
injury.
The cavers had sent a text message via a SPOT sat-
ellite beacon to their callout person, as was the plan, the
night prior. However, the message was not received by the
callout person. There was no response to the text and the
cavers had assumed the message was received.
1. Christian Stenner, Incident Report, 15 August 2018.
2. Brett Wuth, Incident Report, 5 August 2018.
3. Brent Arnold, personal communication, 3 August 2018.
Comments: The American Caving Accidents
committee is aware of at least one other incident of a cave
rescue being initiated after a confirmed "send" of a SPOT
message without confirmation that it was received.


********** 11 August
Fossil Mountain Ice Cave, Wyoming
lost, aid, no injury
Despite reports nearly every year of people get-
ting lost in Fossil Mountain Ice Cave, an Idaho Falls couple
thought that their hiking and rock-climbing experience
would be enough for a successful through trip in the cave.
Jessica (24) and Spencer (31) Christiansen reported that
they had researched the cave online, but apparently they
did not know about needing to rig a rope at the lower end
of the cave to ascend out.
A video the couple released shows Jessica rappel-
ling the first drop, which is covered in ice. In the video, she
is wearing what appears to be rock-climbing footwear and
no knee pads. Spencer can be heard saying, 11 scoot
down
on your butt let your knees get wet." The video shows

---------- Page 31 ----------
poor rappelling technique (including a slack rope at the
edge and long, loose hair dangerously close to the rappel
device) and suggests that the couple was not properly ex-
perienced for this trip. By the time the couple realized they
were lost, they were already wet and very cold. They also
attempted to climb a waterfall, believing that it may be the
way out, but this only made them wetter and colder. They
eventually consumed the remainder of their food, started
burning their gear for warmth, and sat down to wait for
help.
Fortunately, they had a surface watch and they
were rescued 30 hours after entering the cave.
1. Lindsey Bever, "How an Idaho couple survived 30 cold and
wet hours trapped in an ice cave," www.washingtonpost.com, 15
August 2018.
2. Video footage: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/video/news/
video-1745446/Idaho-couple-film-moments-trapped-ice-cave
html
Comments: If you don't do anything else right, at
least have a surface watch.


********** 11 August
Gear Cave, British Columbia, Canada
other, injury, no aid
A team of three cavers was surveying Gear Cave
and attempting to connect it to Bisaro Anima. Vlad Paulik
was digging and moving rocks to try to open a tight pas-
sage. While tossing a small boulder away from him, Pau-
lik's right ring finger struck a sharp limestone projection
on the wall while simultaneously sandwiching his finger
between the wall and the boulder he was throwing. The
resulting injury crushed the fingertip bone and cut signifi-
cantly into the finger below the fingernail. Gear-marking
tape was used to cover and support the wound while Paulik
and team carefully exited the cave. On the surface, gauze
was applied, and the finger was splinted against the middle
finger for support until medical attention could be sought
the next day. X-rays confirmed that the finger bone had
been crushed, and six stitches were placed to close the open
wound.
1. Vlad Paulik, personal communication, 12 August 2018.
Comments: Rocks are harder than fingers. Be
careful out there!


********** 31 August
Main Drain Cave, Utah
caver fall, injury, no aid
On 31 August 2018, six cavers entered Main Drain
Cave in northeastern Utah to support a cave-diving expedi-
tion. Their task was to haul more than a dozen cave packs
full of cave diving gear from a sump, which had just been
pushed, up many pitches to the entrance. Three pairs of
cavers entered the cave between 10:30 and 11:30 a.m. Claire
Gougeon and Amy Morton (43) were the last pair to enter.
Gougeon and Morton descended into the cave,
maintaining a leisurely pace to avoid congestion with the
two teams ahead of them. During their first hour of travel,
Morton started experiencing a headache. The headache
may have been due to Morton not being accustomed to cav-
ing at high elevation; Main Drain Cave's entrance is about
9,000 feet above sea level. Fortunately, there were several
first-aid packs stationed along the main travel route for the
expedition, and Morton took some Tylenol.
Gougeon and Morton continued, completing sev-
eral rappels. Eventually they reached an 8-foot drop that
was rigged for rappelling (although some cavers choose
to use the rope as a handline). Gougeon took the rope
and wrapped it around her arms and across her back for
a double-arm body rappel. After Gougeon rappelled this
way successfully, Morton wanted to try it also. Gougeon
instructed her in the technique. Unfortunately, Morton
slipped during her attempt and swung into the wall, hitting
it with some force. She cried out, then slid down the rope
to the ground with the rope still wrapped around her arms.
Morton reported that she was in a considerable amount of
pain and should probably exit the cave. As the two cavers
began their ascent, Morton started to have difficulty breath-
ing. For several hours, the two cavers slowly but steadily
made their way out of the cave and down the mountain.
Morton was driven to the nearest hospital, where she was
diagnosed with a broken rib and a punctured and partially
collapsed lung.
1. Claire Gougeon, Incident Report, 22 October 2018.
Comments: When wearing vertical gear, there is
rarely a good excuse for handlining instead of clipping into
a rope. If the pitch is exposed enough to warrant the friction
of a body rappel and vertical gear is available, use the fric-
tion of the rappel device on your SRT system. Double-arm
rappels are appropriate only for some slopes, they are not
appropriate for vertical pitches. One-thousand feet below
the surface is a significant depth for a self-rescue, and the
cavers were successful. The effort to do SO is even more im-
pressive considering the patient's collapsed lung.


********** 3 September
unnamed talus cave, British Columbia, Canada
caver fall, injury and aid
A 50-year-old woman and two others were rock
climbing in the Skaha Bluffs area of British Columbia when
they entered a nearby talus cave. They had apparently
planned to do a through-trip, but they changed their minds
when they got to the lower entrance (which reportedly is
tight and requires a challenging move to access). The group
then turned around and tried to exit the cave via the up-
per entrance. The group had rigged a handline on a 16-foot
pitch in the entrance fissure, but nobody had harnesses or
helmets. They opted to ascend out via a route with a 25-foot
pitch. The woman fell down this pitch and suffered seri-
ous head and upper-body injuries. Another member of the
group down-climbed to assist her, and the third member

---------- Page 32 ----------
exited the cave and called 911 just before noon.
Search and rescue teams and the Alberta-British
Columbia Cave Rescue Service arrived around 1:00 p.m.
The initial first aid assessment was that the woman had up-
per-body and possible head injuries. Rescuers packaged the
patient with heat packs, a vacuum bag, a spine board, and
a SKED stretcher that was rigged for vertical lifting. Three
short vertical pitches, continuously rigged, were followed
by a 15-foot horizontal section where rescuers passed the
stretcher across their laps around a 90-degree bend over an
uneven rocky slope to the cave entrance at the bottom of a
30-foot-deep fissure. The patient arrived at the bottom of
the fissure and was lifted out by helicopter long line (HETS)
at 7:00 p.m. She was flown to a waiting ambulance at Skaha
Bluffs parking lot, transported by ground to Penticton hos-
pital, and then transferred to Kelowna hospital for treat-
ment. While awaiting the HETS transport of the patient, the
patient's uninjured companion was assisted out of the cave,
and transported by helicopter offsite. The patient had been
in the cave injured for eight hours.
1. Doug Munroe, Incident Report, September 2018.
Comments: Inexperience and improper gear com-
bined to produce this serious incident.


********** 2 October
Beaver Creek Cave, Missouri
difficulty on rope/ladder, aid, no injury
Beaver Creek Cave is described as a small, easy
cave by local cavers. However, three people still managed
to run into difficulty when one person could not climb back
up a rope ladder at an 8-foot pitch. The man found climb-
ing the ladder to be physically difficult and started having
panic attacks. One of his friends went to call for help while
the other stayed with him. Local firefighters were able to lift
them both up the pit with a simple haul system.
1. Giacomo Bologna, "Firefighters rescue man out of Taney
County cave," www.news-leader.com, 3 October 2018.
2. Jonathan Beard, e-mail communication, 12 March 2019.
Comments: It's all about perspective. A cave that is
small and easy for some can be a panic-inducing nightmare
for others.


********** 5 October
J-4 Cave, Pennsylvania
other, aid, no injury
Authorities were contacted on 6 October regarding
a college-age man who had gone to J-4 Cave the day be-
fore and had not been seen since. The man had planned to
spend two days in the cave meditating. He had his friends
drop him off at the cave with a sleeping bag, warm clothes,
and food. For some reason, his friends became concerned
and contacted the authorities before his planned two-day
visit was up.
The Nittany Grotto was contacted for assistance
and cavers served as guides for the search teams. The search
teams entered the cave with information that the missing
man was likely near the back of the cave; the subject was
actually down a side passage, just 50 feet from the entrance.
He heard the rescuers, but because they were not calling
his name, he assumed it was just other people visiting the
cave. When the communication team entered the cave, the
subject heard them talking about "wires" and became con-
cerned. He approached them and asked what they were do-
ing. Surprised to find that they were there to "rescue" him,
he exited the cave under his own power and agreed to be
examined by EMS on scene before being released to friends.
1. Lauren Muthler, "Emergency response 'teamwork' leads to the
rescue of a man from a Centre County cave," www.centredaily.
com, 6 October 2018.
2. Paul Winter, Incident Report, 4 September 2019.
Comments: Having a clear plan with your surface
watch can help to prevent unnecessary rescue callouts.


********** 6 October
Kennamer Cave, Alabama
lost, aid, no injury
A group of seven Ohio cavers attending the TAG
Fall Cave-In received permission from the SCCI to ex-
plore Kennamer Cave. The group, led by Joe Marchese (54)
planned a through trip, entering through the upper "Dug"
entrance and exiting through the lower "Orgy" entrance.
Other members of the group included Sean (40s), Stephanie
(40), Kara (39), Alexis (20), Anna (16), and Daniel (12). Mar-
chese had explored the cave twice before, but the last time
had been more than 10 years earlier.
The cavers originally planned to leave the Fall
Cave-In site at 10:00 a.m., but due to issues signing all mem-
bers of the group in, they did not set out until 3:00 p.m.
They studied the map and discussed their plans with other
cavers prior to leaving for the cave, but they did not take the
map with them.
Once in the cave, the cavers proceeded without in-
cident until they reached a 20-foot drop called the Vertical
Crawl. Marchese recalled a short rappel near the end of the
cave, but this drop did not look familiar to him, SO he and
the group spent some time route-finding in this area. Even-
tually, the cavers rappelled the Vertical Crawl and, thinking
that they had descended the expected drop near the end,
began looking for their way out. At this point, the cavers
should have been looking for another drop, but they were
not, because they thought they had already rappelled it.
Around 11:00 p.m., the cavers were growing tired,
SO they stopped to rest for a few hours. They were prepared
with trash bags, emergency space blankets, and candles. At
this time, Marchese and Sean decided to climb back up the
Vertical Crawl and retrace their steps back to the upper en-
trance, and then re-enter the cave from the lower entrance
to find the rest of the group.
At approximately 1:00 a.m., a call came in to the
Huntsville Cave Rescue Unit (HCRU) from the Scottsboro-

---------- Page 33 ----------
Jackson County Rescue Squad for missing cavers in Kenna-
mer Cave. The group had missed its callout time, and their
vehicles were still in the parking area. The Chattanooga-
Hamilton County Rescue Service (CHCRS) cave and cliff
team was called in for support under a mutual aid agree-
ment.
HCRU members formed a hasty team (Team 1),
which entered the Dug entrance and quickly found Mar-
chese and Sean on their way out. At this time, rescuers
learned that the rest of the group was waiting with trash
bags, emergency blankets, and candles near the Register
Room. Team 1 escorted the two found cavers to the nearest
communications team, which then reported back to Inci-
dent Command (IC).
Meanwhile, a second hasty team (Team 2), made up
of HCRU and CHCRS personnel, entered the Orgy entrance
and located the rest of the missing group above the 35-foot
climb-down just before the Register Room. The remaining
cavers were lowered down the 35-foot drop and escorted
out of the cave through the Orgy entrance.
1. Anna Huffstutler, "Chattanooga Hamilton County Rescue
Service helped rescue family from cave," www.wrcbtv.com, 6
October 2018.
2. Dan Mattle, e-mail communication, 12 May 2019.
3. Brian Krebs, e-mail communication, 9 September 2019.
4. Joe Marchese, personal communication, 11 September 2019.
Comments: Memory can be quite unreliable, espe-
cially after 10 years. Marchese attributes this incident to a
faulty recollection of the cave and to not bringing the map
into the cave. This was a group of capable and experienced
vertical cavers, and the group was well prepared with food,
water, equipment, and emergency supplies to keep them
safe until they were found. The group left a callout time,
which was honored by cavers back at the event site. The
group was wise to stop to rest and not risk further incident
by pushing past group members' physical limits.


********** 10 November
Shoveleater-Hellhole System, West Virginia
medical issue, no injury, no aid
After a strenuous session of digging and pushing
tight passage in the Rolling Thunder section of Shoveleater
Cave, Mark Minton and Yvonne Droms started heading for
the surface ahead of the rest of their team (Bob Alderson
and Kurt Waldron). The area they were working in is 530
feet deep in the cave, down many rope drops, and at the
end of a long, tight canyon. The many obstructions and
small waterfalls cavers must negotiate are energy-sapping,
especially when carrying a large pack. Once out of that can-
yon, Droms (66) started climbing up Papusha Pit, a 110-foot
pit with a rebelay in the middle. The pit was wet due to
high water.
Droms arrived at the top of the pit and was strug-
gling to get her pack over the lip when she started feeling
faint and her heart started thumping irregularly in her
chest. She clipped into the anchor, removed her ascenders
from the rope, and yelled "rope free" SO that Minton could
start the ascent. She then slumped down, her vision went
dark, and her heart continued to beat wildly and irregu-
larly.
Droms and Minton decided at that point to wait
for the other two cavers SO that they could all travel out to-
gether. Droms had to take several rest breaks and required
some assistance on the free climbs. At one pitch, the team
was worried that Droms might have trouble while on rope.
Waldron established an inline-traveling haul, a type of haul
system that requires only one rescuer and minimal gear. Af-
ter being hauled up this pitch, and thereby being doused in
the waterfall, Droms began feeling better and was able to
continue out with minimal assistance.
The following day, Droms was diagnosed with atri-
al fibrillation due to dehydration, exertion, and possibly a
lack of electrolytes.
1. Yvonne Droms, Incident Report, 24 November 2018.
Comments: While caving, it is easy to get behind
on fluid and nutrient intake. Many ailments seem to be cur-
able with more water and food. It is fortunate that Droms
had the clarity of mind to clip into the anchor when she
began feeling ill. The inline traveling haul is a core small
party assisted rescue (SPAR) technique that is easily built
with a pulley and the patient's SRT gear. When strong SRT
anchors are used, this system allows a patient to be lifted
without the need to rerig anything at the top of the pitch.


********** 20 November
Actun Tunichil Muknal, Belize
flooding, aid, no injury
A group of six tourists and their guide spent the
night in Actun Tunichil Muknal when flooding prevent-
ed them from exiting. The group entered the cave at 2:00
p.m. At 4:30 p.m., the guide informed the group that the
underground river had risen 6 feet since they entered. He
instructed the group to sit down and conserve their lights.
He knew that rescuers would come quickly if his group was
not out on time.
Rescuers made contact with the group at 1:30 a.m.
They brought the stranded tourists "snacks, water, and Tres
Leches cake." The twenty rescuers then helped the group
through swift-moving water and out of the cave. More res-
cuers were ready outside the cave with a fire to warm the
group and a mile-long trail cut through the jungle to avoid
the usual trail's many river crossings.
1. News staff, "Reports of a rescue at 'Actun Tunichil Muknal'
Cave near Teakettle," www.reporter.bz, 21 November 2018.
2. Trip Advisor member, "Rescued after spending the night in
the cave due to flash flood," www.tripadvisor.com, 30 November
2018.
Comments: Reports indicated that more than 5
inches of rain fell in about one hour in the mountains above
the cave but it is unclear if the guide was aware of the storm.
Once he was aware of the flooding, the guide kept the group
safe by having them wait for the floodwaters to recede and
for the rescue response that he knew would arrive.

---------- Page 34 ----------


********** 24 November
Huccacove Cave, Colorado
caver fall, injury, no aid
Nine cavers attended a Thanksgiving weekend ex-
pedition to Huccacove Cave. On the first day, just before
noon, one of the trip leaders lost his footing on The Ramp
and tried to recover from the fall by grabbing a rock pro-
jection. This effort was enough to avoid falling down the
length of the ramp, but the maneuver resulted in a dislo-
cated left shoulder.
The injured trip leader was assisted down The
Ramp to the floor of the Little Grand Canyon, where the
dislocated arm was reset. This helped the patient to regain
some mobility and the patient was able to assist in his own
self-rescue.
1. Max Khaytsus, Incident Report, 26 November 2018.
Comments: Huccacove is a joint-controlled cave
that has many tall, narrow, interconnecting passages with
many drops and climbs and a 125-foot-long belly crawl. In
his report, Khaytsus credits the good decision-making and
ability to self-rescue to six of the trip's participants having
had various levels of cave-rescue training.


********** 30 December
unspecified cave, Arkansas
caver fall, injury and aid
A group of ten cavers, four from Arkansas and six
from Texas, entered a cave in Newton County, anticipating
a complete trip of 14 to 15 hours. The cave has a 70-foot ver-
tical entrance pit, followed by difficult movement through
various levels of tough passages. All ten were experienced
cavers with basic vertical skills. The trip leader was highly
experienced and knowledgeable about this cave. After 6.5
hours of travel, the group reached a location near the back
of the cave with an overlook. To reach this overlook, they
climbed a breakdown pile and crossed a 3.5-foot-wide gap
known as the "Texas Step," which has a permanently in-
stalled handline.
Returning from the overlook, the cavers stepped
across the Texas Step and started down the breakdown pile.
At approximately 6:00 p.m., one caver (female, 28), slipped
while stepping back across the Texas Step and fell 15 to 20
feet to the floor below.
It was immediately apparent that she had a broken
upper left arm, possibly broken ribs, and a possible back
injury. Later at the hospital her injuries were diagnosed as
a dislocated left rotator cuff, a broken left arm, and a bro-
ken left pinky finger. Four cavers stayed with the patient
to render first aid while the other cavers "sprinted for the
entrance." They emerged at 9:00 p.m. and called local au-
thorities as well as other cavers, who activated a cave-res-
cue phone tree.
Rescuers began arriving within an hour. A local
caver who knew the cave well assumed the role of incident
commander and coordinated the initial response. At 2:00
a.m. on 31 December, the Initial Response Team (IRT) of
four cavers went into the cave taking supplies and flagging
the route to the accident site. A second team of four cav-
ers entered the cave at 3:30 a.m. bringing more supplies.
The IRT and second team joined together in-cave and ar-
rived at the accident site about 7:30 a.m. Though it was 13.5
hours after the fall, the IRT found the patient to be in fairly
good condition. She had been able to sleep, was mentally
alert, and was able to stand up and walk. She was eager
to get out of the cave. Rescuers used an elastic bandage
to immobilize her left arm and gave her pain medication.
The rescuers ruled out a back injury and determined that
the patient could safely travel without the use of a litter.
At 9:00 a.m., one caver from the IRTand three of the Texans
who had spent the night with the patient began to travel
toward the cave entrance. Shortly after 9:00 a.m., the patient
began traveling toward the cave entrance with the remain-
ing members of the IRT and one of the original cavers; this
group was referred to as the movement team.
Between 10:45 a.m. and 3:25 p.m., two bolting
teams, a communications team, a supply team, and a medi-
cal team with an EMT entered the cave. Meanwhile, un-
known to the incoming rescue teams, the movement team
was on its way out. Midway along the route between the
entrance and the back of the cave, the cave divides into two
extended, parallel routes that eventually rejoin. The move-
ment team used the route that the IRT had flagged on its
way in. The bolting teams, communication team, and medi-
cal team joined together in-cave and took the other route,
believing that it would be better for evacuating a patient
in a litter. The incoming and outgoing teams passed each
other on the different routes without making contact.
Around 2:30 p.m., the county sheriff arrived on site
and assumed the role of incident command. He allowed the
ongoing rescue operation to proceed in the hands of the
cavers who were conducting it.
Approximately 26.5 hours after her fall the evening
before, the patient was raised to the surface in a Ferno litter
and transported to the local hospital. The last of the rescu-
ers in the cave emerged around 3:00 a.m. on New Year's
Day.
1. Bill Bowden, "26 hours after fall, woman rescued from Arkan-
sas cave," www.arkansasonline.com 6 January 2019.
2. Terry Mitchell, Incident Report, 30 January 2019.
Comments: In his detailed report of this incident
Terry Mitchell says, "The mission was accomplished much
faster than anyone expected, because the patient did not
have any back injury, and she was able to move herself
through the cave with assistance. She persevered and car-
ried on despite her pain and immobile left arm." He also
noted that communication between surface and subsur-
face teams was difficult. Communication is one of the most
problematic aspects in cave rescue and should always be a
major focus in any cave-rescue training event.

---------- Page 35 ----------
2018 Cave Diving Accidents and Incidents


********** 20 January
Eagles Nest, Florida
fatality, drowning
Davin Brannon (53) and a friend were diving Ea-
gles Nest with plans to go only as far as the Ballroom. As
they entered the Ballroom, Brannon had what was reported
as a "medical episode" and lost consciousness. His friend
was able to bring him to the surface, but Brannon did not
survive.
1. News staff, "Diver found dead at Eagles Nest cave diving site,"
www.fox13news.com, 20 January 2018.
2. Paul Guzzo, "Hillsborough diver who died in Eagles Nest
Cave was adventurous but experienced," www.tampabay.com,
21 January 2018.
Comments: Unlike in dry caving, "medical epi-
sodes" that occur in cave diving often lead to death before
the patient can be rescued.


********** 16 June
Sistema Sac Actun (Cenote Manatí),
Quintana Roo, Mexico
fatality, drowning
On 16 June, a diver died near Tulum, Mexico, dur-
ing a Discover Scuba program that began in open water but
resulted in one diver entering an underwater cave and be-
ing unable to exit before running out of air. Discover Scu-
ba is a course designed to give non-divers a scuba diving
experience in a safe environment. Under ideal conditions
(clear water, no appreciable current), the course is taught
by one instructor to no more than four students; two more
students may be added if the instructor has an assistant.
Throughout the course, students must be under the imme-
diate control of the instructor or assistant. If conditions are
less than ideal, then the student-instructor ratio must be re-
duced or the course canceled. In this incident, a group of 10
young men contracted with a local instructor who provided
an instructional team reported to consist of one instructor
and two assistants.
The site chosen for this dive was Cenote Manatí, a
large sinkhole formed by the collapse of a long section of
cave that is the outflow of the extensive Sac Actun underwa-
ter cave system in the Yucatan Peninsula. The cenote ends
near the sea, with the water flowing underground from the
cenote into a bay. This creates a siphon cave, meaning that
the water in the cenote flows into the cave toward the ocean.
Diving a siphon is dangerous because the current can im-
pede or prevent a return to the entrance. Experienced cave
divers know to use caution whenever entering a siphon.
On this day, the current was particularly strong due
to recent heavy rains. A whirlpool was reportedly visible on
the surface of the cenote near the entrance to the cave. The
rains also reduced visibility to a reported three feet. These
conditions were not suitable for a Discover Scuba class.
Shortly after the dive began, some students sur-
faced because of the poor conditions and quit the dive. The
remainder completed their underwater tour of the area.
When the remaining group surfaced, two students were
missing. After a search, one of the assistants found the two
missing divers struggling in the current by the cave en-
trance. One of them was able to hold onto the assistant and
be pulled to safety, but the other could not hold on and was
pulled into the cave by the current. The assistant took the
first diver to the surface, but there was no attempt to enter
the cave to rescue the second.
A team of experienced cave divers was called, but
given the delay in their arrival, there was no hope of a res-
cue. They were unable to locate the body due to the poor
visibility. The next day, a 10-person team of divers found
the diver's body wedged in a crack in the rock and brought
him to the surface. An analysis of the victim's equipment
indicated that it was complete and functioning properly. It
would have been possible for the diver to follow the flow of
the cave and exit into the bay, but that exit was not visible,
and he likely would not have known that it was possible.
The instructional team left early in the process and
was not immediately identified. There are reports that the
lead instructor did not enter the water and that the group
may have been led underwater by only the two assistants.
The local legal authorities were not immediately involved
in the recovery, and no reports were made in local media.
After an investigation, the contracting instructor was ex-
pelled by his credentialing agency.
Information for this report was provided by mem-
bers of the team that recovered the body. They were not
able to identify the victim.
1. James Coke, Jeff Clark, Kim Davidsson, Luis Leal, Alessandro
Reato, Incident Report, undated.
2. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 20 March
2019.


********** 23 August
Main Drain Cave, Utah
equipment problem, no injury, no aid
David Moore and Jean Krejca entered Main Drain
Cave on 22 August as divers for an expedition whose goals
included pushing sumps. After dropping some gear off at
an underground camp, the two made their way to the first
sump, which they had dived on an earlier expedition. They
spent most of the day at the first sump, unpacking and as-
sembling dive gear. The difficult cave and its cold temper-
atures were hard on their gear and caused several issues
including the failure of three high-pressure hoses, leaking
tanks, a leaking buoyancy compensator inflator hose, and
a malfunctioning tank valve. After their experience in the
cave in 2016, Moore and Krejca were prepared for these
problems and were able to solve most of the issues.
Entering Sump 1, the divers found that previous

---------- Page 36 ----------
flooding had damaged a dive line that they had installed
two years earlier. Reestablishing a continuous line caused
them to consume more gas than planned, but because they
had their back-up tanks, they determined that they would
be fine to continue.
Emerging from Sump 1, the divers carried their
gear through dry passage to Sump 2. When they reached
Sump 2, they were surprised to find that the pool was gone.
Continuing on, they reached a third sump. Transporting
their gear from Sump 1 to the third sump required travel-
ing 1,000 feet of dry cave six times. They were ready to push
the third sump by 8:00 p.m.
When they could not find a way on from the third
sump, the divers decided that it was time to head back to
camp. Krejca noted that her fingers were SO cold that it felt
like they were being slammed in a car door, thus the third
sump was named Fingers in a Car Door Sump. The divers
made several trips to transport their gear back to Sump 1.
By then, Moore's dry suit gloves were leaking, and pieces of
their regulators were not functioning properly.
As Krejca suited up to enter Sump 1, the zipper of
her dry suit jammed and despite their best efforts, neither
Krejca nor Moore could fix it. Her only option was to dive
Sump 1 with a leaky dry suit. The sump is approximately
500 feet long and 80 feet deep, and the water is 38°F. Not
only was the water dangerously cold, but the malfunction-
ing dry suit made it difficult for Krejca to maintain the
proper amount of buoyancy. Fortunately, Krejca's physical
and mental toughness, along with her experience in diving
this sump, got her through the ordeal successfully.
1. Jean Krejca, "Main Drain Cave Diving 2018," NSS News, Janu-
ary 2019, Volume 77, Number 1, pages 7-11.


********** 14 November
Sistema Sac Actun (Cenote Calimba),
Quintana Roo, Mexico
2 fatalities, drowning
On 14 November, two German cave divers died in
the Sac Actun cave system near Tulum, Mexico, when they
ran out of breathing gas. Diver 1 (47) was an experienced
cave diver with extensive experience in the Mexican cave
systems, including Sac Actun. Diver 2 (37) was experienced,
but not as extensively. He had been in the area on one
previous trip. The Sac Actun system is massive and com-
plex, with many branching passages leading to a number
of cenotes, or openings to the surface. The divers entered
the system at Cenote Calimba and planned to return there
for their exit, but for some reason they attempted to exit at
Gran Cenote instead.
When they entered at Cenote Calimba, each diver
wore two side-mounted 80-cubic-foot aluminum tanks (AL
80s) and carried a third AL 80 as a stage bottle. They also
carried a video camera, which provided a clear record of
much of their dive. Following common cave-diving prac-
tice, they used the stage bottles for the early part of the dive.
They then clipped the stage bottles to the guideline when
they were half full, and they planned to pick them up on
their return. The divers took 5-8 minutes longer to reach
that distance than would be expected, likely because of
their video work. This extra time meant that the stage bot-
tles were deposited closer to the cenote opening than usual.
After depositing the stage bottles, the divers contin-
ued, following standard cave-diving protocols for making
jumps, or temporary connections in the gaps in the perma-
nent line, as they explored an area known as Much's Maze.
They continued past Much's Maze until they reached their
turnaround point and began the return to Calimba. Their
return was routine and unhurried. They took their time to
retrieve their jump lines, which they would not have done
if they had been stressed. At the 93-minute point in their
dive, everything appears to be routine, but at that point the
video ends.
Shortly after the video ends, at about the 100-min-
ute point, the divers apparently decided to reverse course
and head for the Gran Cenote exit rather than Calimba.
Terse comments written on their wetnotes indicate that they
realized that they were in trouble with their gas supply and
had to exit quickly. They elected to go to Gran Cenote, ap-
parently assuming that it would be quicker to reach that
exit than it would be to reach stage bottles they had left at
Calimba.
Dive investigators are not clear on why the divers
ran out of gas. They may have had made a navigational er-
ror, but evidence indicates that not enough time had passed
for a serious error to occur. It is more likely that they real-
ized that they did not have enough gas to make the exit
as originally planned. This gas shortage could have been
caused by an unexpected catastrophic gas loss, but later
analysis of their equipment indicated no malfunctions.
Whatever the reason, the divers apparently head-
ed for Gran Cenote with not enough gas to make the exit.
The divers would not have had to reach Gran Cenote it-
self. Along the way is another cenote, Ho-Tul, a small and
hard to spot cenote with no line leading to it. Because of a
common cave-diving policy of having no permanent lines
in view of a cave entrance, the permanent lines near Ho-
Tul have large gaps, meaning that there was no permanent
guideline along the path to Gran Cenote for a significant
distance, and there was no guideline leading to the Ho-Tul
Cenote. The divers would have been on their own navigat-
ing the last portion to Ho-Tul.
The large gap between the Calimba line and the
Gran Cenote mainline at that point is called Paso de Lagar-
to. Diver 1 was found at the beginning of that gap with
his mask and helmet removed; his primary dive light was
found before that point. Both his sidemount regulator hoses
were deployed, indicating that he had likely shared air with
his teammate. Diver 2 was found at the end of the Paso de
Lagarto gap, about 20 meters from the surface of Cenote
Ho-Tul but past the Ho-Tul exit. His gear was intact. Ac-
cording to their computers, both divers perished at 127
minutes into the dive.
1. Kim Davidsson and Dr. Johan Isaksson, Incident Report, 22
February 2019.
2. John Adsit, Report for American Caving Accidents, 30 Sept. 2019.

---------- Page 37 ----------
Comments: Cave divers use gas-planning strate-
gies to ensure that they have enough gas to complete their
dives. Some of those strategies are discussed here.
Rule of thirds: Cave divers frequently use the rule of
thirds in determining when to turn a dive around. The rule
of thirds states that a diver uses 1/3 of the gas supply going
into the cave and 1/3 returning to the exit, leaving 1/3 for
emergencies. Because no dive is perfect, this is only a gen-
eral guideline that is adjusted based on the circumstances.
When diving in caves with negligible current, or when en-
tering a cave going into the current, this rule is typically
followed precisely. In contrast, when entering a cave go-
ing with the current, divers should expect to use more gas
while exiting against the current and should turn the dive
around before reaching the first third.
Stage Bottles: Divers may carry additional tanks,
called stage bottles, to provide more gas. The most com-
mon usage is to start the dive breathing from the stage bot-
tle until a certain pressure is reached, at which point the
divers leave the stage bottles clipped to the line SO that they
can retrieve them when they are exiting the cave. If divers
are using the rule of thirds with their main tanks, they will
typically apply this rule to the stage bottles as well, leaving
them with 2/3 of the gas for the exit. If divers instead use
half of the stage for the entrance, they will turn the dive
around at a fourth of their primary tanks to be safe with
that lesser amount of gas left in the stage bottles.
In this incident, the current of the water is from
Calimba to Gran Cenote, SO under the rule of thirds, divers
should turn the dive around before reaching the first third,
as they will have more difficulty swimming into the current
on their return. In this case, the divers had used half of their
2018 Caving-Related Accidents and Incidents


********** 10 February
unspecified cave, Tennessee
dog fell into pit
The Knoxville Volunteer Emergency Rescue Squad
received a call about a coon dog named Tanner who had
fallen into a pit. Luckily for Tanner, he was wearing a collar
with a GPS tracking device, SO his owner was able to locate
him. The rescue squad's cave and vertical rescue team rap-
pelled into the pit and hauled Tanner to safety.
1. Hayes Hickman, "Lost dog rescued from 30-foot-deep pit,"
www.knoxnews.com, 12 February 2018.


********** 12 February
Bear Creek Cave, British Columbia, Canada
fell into cave, injury and aid
A 23-year-old man and his girlfriend hiked to the
Skutz Falls area to look at caves the man was curious about.
He was standing on a rock at the edge of a sinkhole, trying
to look down a pit, when he fell in. The pit is approximately
100 feet deep with several ledges and he may have fallen
about half that distance. His girlfriend witnessed the fall
stage bottles, SO they should have been following the rule of
fourths with their primary tanks. Because of the time they
spent videoing, the divers were not as far as usual into the
cave when their stage bottles reached half pressure. Leav-
ing the stage bottles on the line at that point meant that the
stage bottles were closer to the entrance and farther from
the turnaround point of the dive than usual. If they had car-
ried the stage bottles farther into the cave before dropping
them off, the bottles would have been much closer when the
divers realized that they were in trouble.
Whether they were planning to dive to fourths or
thirds, the divers should have had enough gas to reach
either the exit at Gran Cenote or their stage bottles near
Calimba. The fact that they realized they were in trouble
at that time indicates they had a serious shortage of gas.
As there was no sign of equipment malfunction, the most
likely explanation is that one or both of the divers had gone
past his planned turnaround pressure, even though they
must have been monitoring their gas when turning the
dive around, and they were not in a hurry until well after
that. Whatever the reason, the divers apparently decided it
would be easier to exit with the current at Gran Cenote than
go against it to their stage bottles.
Investigators cannot determine when the divers
shared air, although the fact that Diver 1's hoses were still
deployed suggests that they finished sharing air near where
his body was found, as he likely would have stowed the
hose while diving to eliminate the regulator dragging. In-
vestigators speculate that they may have recognized that
Diver 1 had more gas than Diver 2, that they shared air to
make their supplies more equal, and that they separated at
the point that the tank they were sharing was empty.
The Knoxville Volunteer Emergency Rescue Squad pose with
Tanner, a coon dog they rescued from a pit. Photo courtesy of
KVERS.
and reported that he "ricocheted" off the walls of the pit on
the way down. She ran down the trail until she could get
cell service, and she called 911. Meanwhile, the man, using
a tree that had fallen in previously, was able to climb out of
the pit and crawl to the trail. Other hikers found him and
administered first aid.
A search and rescue (SAR) team arrived shortly
thereafter. The SAR team assessed the patient and found

---------- Page 38 ----------
that he had fractures to one leg, a possible spinal-cord in-
jury, and abrasions on his head, indicating a possible head
injury. He couldn't feel his left leg from the knee down,
and he had lost significant blood volume from a puncture
wound at the site of a broken femur. The man was carried
out, transferred to an ambulance crew, taken to a hospital
in Cowichan, and then transferred to another hospital in
Victoria, where he underwent extensive surgery.
1. Doug Munroe, Incident Report, 14 February 2018.
Comments: When looking over the edge of a pitch,
a good practice is to get down low. Crawling out to the edge
to look over is much safer than standing on the edge. Take
extra care any time you are within one-body length (about
6 feet) of the fall zone.


********** 26 March
Carlsbad Caverns, New Mexico
stranded in elevator, aid, no injury
A 17-year-old boy and two women (46 and 66)
were riding the elevator down into Carlsbad Caverns when
it suddenly stopped at a depth of 740 feet. The tourists used
the elevator's emergency phone to call for help and were
told that Park staff was aware of the situation and that help
would arrive soon.
Members of the Carlsbad Fire Department and Na-
tional Park Service staff rode down in a second elevator.
They accessed the stranded tourists through the top of the
non-functioning elevator and found them to be uninjured
and in good spirits despite waiting nearly three hours for
rescue. Using a ladder and safety harnesses, the three were
assisted up and out of the disabled elevator car and across
to the working elevator.
1. Adrian C. Heddon, "Carlsbad Caverns National Park elevator
malfunctions, strands 3 visitors 740 feet underground," www.
currentargus.com, 27 March 2018.
2. Adrian C. Heddon, "Stranded: Family rescued from Carlsbad
Caverns elevator 740 feet underground," www.currentargus.
com, 29 March 2018.
Comments: Carlsbad Fire Department and Na-
tional Park Service staff train together regularly on elevator
rescue.


********** 10 October
Ausmus Well, Tennessee
2 dog fatalities, fell into pit
Two dogs fell into Ausmus Well while on a walk
with their owner. The pit is located 100 feet from a road
and is 125 feet deep. The Knoxville Volunteer Emergency
Rescue Squad responded but neither dog survived the fall.
1. WBIR Staff, "2 hunting dogs die after getting trapped in cave in
Union County," www.wbir.com, 11 October 2018.
2. Gerald Moni, e-mail communication, 3 March 2019.


********** 27 October
Sloans Valley Cave, Kentucky
dog stranded in cave
On 27 October, a dog named Blossom chased a cat
into Sloans Valley Cave. When a rescue team was unable to
retrieve the dog, the distraught owner posted on Facebook,
asking cavers for help. Two cavers responded to the request
and were able to safely retrieve Blossom.
1. Bridgett Howard, "Dog stranded in cave for 10 hours," www.
lex18.com, 29 October 2018.
Comments: Nobody seemed to be concerned for
what became of the cat.


********** 26 November
unspecified cave, Tennessee
dog fell into pit
Another dog required rescue after falling into a pit.
The dog had been missing for nearly two weeks before the
local fire and rescue squad and an Animal Control Officer
were able to retrieve the dog. The dog was reportedly mud-
dy and hungry but otherwise in good health.
1. Staff, "Madisonville Fire-Rescue, MPD help dog out of cave on
private property," www.wate.com, 26 November 2018.
An Animal Control officer carries a dog to
the surface from an unspecified cave. Photo
courtesy of Madisonville Fire and Rescue.
Hope Brooks emerges from a cave entrance in this humor category
entry in the 2019 Photo Salon entitled "The Hike is the Worst Part."
It earned an Honorable Mention for Ryan Maurer. I thought it a fitting
end to our accident reports to note that many of our worst hazards in
caving are getting to and from the cave. Happy Caving and Stay Safe!

---------- Page 39 ----------
Creating a Safe and Educational Environment for Vertical-training Practice
Kurt Waldron NSS 49042 and Bonny Armstrong NSS 43003
There are reasons new cavers should
and hay barns. If your location will have
be trained above ground first in single
you physically separated from any of your
rope techniques (SRT). Training above
students (such as when on a cliff), make sure
ground provides a controlled environment.
that you have experienced people at the
Instructors are better able to see and commu-
top and bottom that can help you with any
nicate with the novice, rigging is more easily
problems that may develop.
configured for lowering or rescue, and the
A competent instructor can usually
consequences if something goes wrong
monitor two students simultaneously. The
are usually less severe. But accidents and
authors do not recommend that an instructor
problems can still occur even in a training
attempt to monitor more than three students
session. It is therefore important that we
on rope.
discuss techniques that minimize the risk of
incidents and accidents during training. This
Gear - Assume that beginners do not
article will look at a few simple guidelines to
have their own gear. At best, they may have
help ensure your SRT-training practice is
only a helmet, gloves, and boots. Having
both safe and educational.
a complete set of fully-functioning gear is
important for the novice to get the most out
Choosing a location - The best
of the training. Take the time to assemble a
vertical training seldom occurs in a cave.
complete vertical kit that will fit the beginner
Training should take place in a controlled
properly. Loaning beginners old, worn-out
environment where you have good visibility
gear that you no longer use may be inefficient
and communication around the entire train-
or even dangerous. If you think the gear is no
ing area. Do not pick sites where the student
longer worth using, an inexperienced person
can get too far away from you and can enter
probably shouldn't use it either.
a dangerous situation. Choose a location that
Start your demonstration with your gear
will minimize the hazards to movement of
already on. Discuss what each piece is called
people who are not on rope. If the chosen
and what its function is. Assist the beginner
location is at the top of a cliff, make sure
in putting on their gear. Take the time to
that students can be more than a body length
adjust everything properly and be sure to
from the edge when they are not on rope. At
explain how and why you are making those
the bottom, make sure there is some way for
adjustments. Use component names such
students to get out of the fall zone.
as Croll, upper ascender, footloop, etc., as
The environments most likely to provide
opposed to "this thing" and "that thing," to
ideal training include (but are not limited to)
help them become familiar and comfortable
gymnasiums, warehouses, trees, and cliffs.
with the terminology. By now they are prob-
Resourceful instructors have set up excellent
ably anxious to get on rope, but practicing
training opportunities in a variety of other
putting on gear more than once is worth
unconventional settings such as pedestrian
the time since beginners often struggle with
bridges, a decommissioned elevator shaft,
this if they've only been shown once. Show
the student how to perform a safety check
of their gear.
Realize that students will probably learn
from others who use different gear and
techniques. The words "always" and "never"
should be used only when appropriate.
Explain concepts and techniques using criti-
cal thinking instead of rule-based thinking.
An example of rule-based thinking is "Never
use a carabiner to attach your rack to your
D-ring." To encourage critical thinking try
instead, "Using a small maillon to attach
your rack will help prevent accidental cross
loading and breaking of the carabiner."
Rigging - Because students some-
times encounter problems that leave them
stuck on rope, rig all ropes such that they can
lower the climber. The rigging must always
Joel Flewelling trains the next generation
be suitable to lower single-person loads. This
of vertical cavers. Photo courtesy of Joel
will require the use of a Munter hitch or a
Flewelling
rack. If two-person loads are likely, use a
super Munter or a 6-bar rack. Practice ropes
should be long enough to lower a student
who is near the top of the climbing rope. If
the rigging will not facilitate safely lowering
the student, have another plan to get them
off rope. For example, a ladder will often
allow the rescue of a stuck student.
Anchors should be considered carefully.
Use "bomber" anchors that can withstand
the stress generated by a student who is
not moving smoothly or efficiently on the
rope. Never use porch railings, picnic tables,
vehicle bumpers, and SO on.
The students are always watching, SO
be sure to always have good rigging habits
even if they are not essential. For example,
tie knots in both ends of the rope, even if not
required. Always wear gloves when operating
the rigging. Use simple rigging and keep it
as close to picture-perfect as possible. Make
sure the bights on your knots are small, the
tails on the knots are the appropriate length,
and use safety knots only when needed.
Double-check all of your work for safety,
especially that you lock all of your carabiners.
Never miss a chance to teach your
students. Discuss the rigging with them and
show them how to evaluate it for safety and
efficiency. Encourage students to check
rigging every time they get on rope; it is
a good safety check as well as learning
experience.
Teach students basic knots if they don't
already know them. Recommended knots for
beginners to learn are figure-eight on a bight,
figure-eight follow-through, bowline, butter-
fly, double-fisherman's, and Prusik hitch.
On Rope and Off Rope protocol
Set a good example and create good habits
by using these terms even in a gym. On
Rope means: I am approaching the fall zone
SO everyone else should be clear. No other
Vertical training at an NCRC event. Students
work one-on-one with an instructor from a
releasable rope. Photo by David Angel.

---------- Page 40 ----------
what they are doing and more importantly,
why they are doing it.
Avoid long monologues that contain
excessive information. Tell the student what
they need to know, when they need to know
it. As the student internalizes skills, give
them additional information. If the student
understands what you asked them to do, let
them try to do it. If you see them make a
mistake, it is better to ask them questions that
will help them realize what they are doing
wrong instead of simply telling them what
to do. In some cases, it is acceptable to let a
student attempt a technique, fail, and then
ANDI
problem solve their way out of the mistake
FIRE/EUS
they made. Your decision about speaking
up should be based on risk to the student,
student frustration level, or time and effort
required to fix the problem that will result.
When is a student ready to do SRT
underground? - Basic skills should be
mastered before novice cavers get on rope
underground for the first time. These skills
Each year, the NSS's Vertical Section offers
include: putting on gear and doing a safety
a vertical training workshop at the annual
check, ascending, rappelling, performing a
NSS convention. This student is practicing
rebelays under the watchful eye of Terry
change-over in both directions, downclimb-
Mitchell. Photo by Gene Harrison.
command is needed, although some cavers
like to follow with "rappelling" or "climbing"
when they start traveling on rope. Off Rope
SOCIETY
means: I have removed my gear, I am out
of the fall zone, the rope is properly placed,
Cleveland Grotto Offers 2020
rope pads are in place, etc. A reply of "OK"
Science Grants
should be given to indicate the on-rope or
The Cleveland Grotto (NSS 005) will
off-rope call was heard.
make available a total of approximately
$2000 in science grants for cave-related
Belays - Using an extra rope for a
projects in early 2020. The Grotto antici-
belay can cause some problems: ropes can
pates making three to six grants of various
become tangled, a second rope may interfere
amounts to bona fide research projects by
with ascending gear, and it requires another
members of NSS-affiliate grottos or to proj-
person who knows how to operate a belay
ects under the aegis of a college or university.
correctly. For rappelling practice, a bottom
Grants are not geographically limited.
(fireman's) belay can be used. The belayer
The funds are available from the
should be attentive, experienced, and out of
Cleveland Grotto Science Fund, which was
the rockfall zone. Especially with beginners
endowed by Bob Danielson (NSS-26333L)
who are nervous, demonstrate a bottom
and his wife Bev. The money is available to
belay while they are on rope. For ascending
support research in geology, streams and
practice, use a rope treadmill SO the student
water, biota, karst and other cave-related
is never very far off the ground. Placing a
research projects.
climber's bouldering pad or gymnastics pad
Requests for equipment grants will be
under the climber can add an extra level of
awarded mainly to institutions (schools,
safety.
grottos). If an individual capital grant for
equipment is made and no supporting institu-
Nurture comprehension
tion is available to maintain the equipment
Encourage the student to verbally state their
after the project is completed, the equipment
actions to multi-step procedures like rigging,
will become the property of the Cleveland
changeovers, and crossing rebelays, and to
Grotto.
state their thoughts when solving problems
Applicants will be expected to have
on rope. When possible, encourage students
their project output published in an official
to explain concepts and techniques to one
publication, preferably the Journal of Cave
another. This allows them to internalize
and Karst Studies, NSS News, an academic
concepts and forces them to understand
journal or other similar publication. For all
ing on ascenders, performing a rappel test,
understanding on rope/off rope commands,
and a knowledge of basic knots. On vertical
trips with beginners, bring extra rope or rig
for contingencies, and have an appropri-
ate ratio of experienced vertical cavers to
novices.
Some advice for new vertical
cavers - Although this article is written
primarily for those teaching SRT, a certain
amount of responsibility lies with the student.
If anything seems unsafe or doesn't feel
right, stop and ask. A competent instructor
will take the time to listen and discuss your
concerns. Work with experienced cavers
until you are proficient in SRT. Rushing into
vertical caving can be dangerous for you and
it can put others at risk. Accidents in caves
not only harm people, but it can put cave
access at risk for everyone.
Vertical-training practice sessions offer
experienced cavers a chance to mentor the
next generation of the NSS family. Any
person interested in taking the time to learn
caving techniques should be supported by
other cavers in a friendly, encouraging, and
most of all, safe environment.
NEWS
activities to be undertaken if there is any
question regarding legality or access, the
necessary permissions must be sought from
all appropriate and potentially involved
parties (landowners, government organiza-
tions, etc.) Fund monies are not permitted
to be used for travel or in any way that is
illegal, unethical, or objectionably danger-
ous. Awarding of grants and the amounts
of each grant will be made at the discretion
of the Cleveland Grotto Board whose deci-
sions are final.
The application is available at http://
www.clevelandgrotto.org/ClevelandGrotto/
Science_Fund.html For questions or clari-
fication contact Rich Kline, Science Fund
Chair, at rkliner@gmail.com Deadline
for submission for the 2020 Grants is
December 31, 2019. Awards expected to
be announced early February 2020.

---------- Page 41 ----------
AVE CHRONICLES
What have you learned from
Jon Mnich
reading American Caving
A lot of incidents go unreported.
Accidents (ACA)?
Yvonne Droms
It has taught me that some very serious
I have studied ACA for many years and
accidents have happened to cavers, and yet
today in part gauge my danger level by
they have come out of it. This is what I will
a rescue team's ability to assist me. In
think of if ever anything really bad happens
another country or in a remote place, I
to me: that others have survived similar
use far more caution - a lesson I learned
situations, and SO just need to hang in there,
from ACA. It is an important read and a
be strong, and survive it too.
great topic!
Jeff Cody
James Wells
I have read everyone since I became a
American Caving Accidents is the single
member back in 1983 and I can say I have
most important caving publication anywhere.
learned more from caving accident reports
I'll never be able to directly assess which
than any single publication.
accidents ACA has helped me to avoid
over the last few decades, but it has almost
Kara Posso
certainly saved a number of lives, maybe
Your pack tether should have a locking
mine. Rather than a single lesson (don't do
carabiner.
X), I think that reading and rereading ACA
promotes an awareness of a wide variety
Janice Tucker
of hazards in caving, and accelerates the
I learned that I can use it to talk people OUT
learning process SO not everyone has to learn
of doing crazy things. I can make comments
about each hazard the hard way.
such as, "Think how stupid this will look on
an accident report."
Sarah Richards
I learned to have people check my gear
Lots. Honestly, ACA is one of the most
before getting on rappel.
valuable resources included with an NSS
membership.
Ginger Reddig
From reading a search and rescue book that
Philip Rykwalder
references the ACA, experienced cavers will
Don't put your head underwater!!
make every attempt possible to self rescue
to avoid embarrassment among colleagues.
Daryl Greaser
Inexperienced explorers are likely to respond
Tie a knot at the end of the rope!! (Between
to searchers' attempts to contact them, but
ACA and Accidents in North American
experienced cavers may not respond until
Mountaineering, this is *far* too common
searchers are very close to avoid looking like
still!)
they're yelling at nothing.
Allan Cobb
Linda Palit
It sucks to have an accident in a cave.
Anybody can have a problem or have an
accident. The crucial element is to not
Nicole Ridlen
make things worse by panic or making poor
Don't be a cave diver. Tongue-in-cheek, but
decisions trying to solve the incident.
I would say that reading ACA over the years
has shown that a greater proportion of cave
Buford Pruitt
diving accidents are fatalities as opposed to
The First Rule of Caving: Know your own
dry cave accidents.
limitations.
Chris Hudson
Scott McCrea
That I don't ever want to appear in it again!
ACA only works if we send in reports.
Myrna Attaway
Roggie Haley
Never go caving with Andy Zellner unless he
.to be careful not to get manparts caught
brought a pizza along.
in an ascender!
Martha G Bryant
Even experienced cavers can have accidents.
Philip
Scott Linn
Here's another vote for it being one of the
best publications you can read as a caver.
Galen Falgout
That more people should read them!
John Lyles
I was in it once. I'm still alive thank you.
Kevin Manley
That I don't want to be in it!
Galen Hekhuis
Don't have an accident in a cave.
The question was posed on the NSS
community page on Facebook and
respondents were asked for permission to
print their answers here.
®
CFC
Combined Federal Campaign
CFC 2019 selection has begun!
Check 15492 for the National
Speleological Foundation.
Federal employees, federal retirees,
federal contractors, active, reserve and
retired military, are able to participate
in the Combined Federal Campaign.
Charity selection is through January
12, 2020.
CFC donations through the
National Speleological Foundation go to
the NSS Permanent Endowment Fund.

---------- Page 42 ----------
UNDERGROUND VRD ATE
Cave Crawlers Gazette
Central Arizona Grotto
September 2019, Vol. 61, Number 9
While surveying Grand Canyon
Caverns, cavers stumbled upon a hidden
passage that, with a little hammer drill
encouragement, allowed access to a room
inscribed with signatures of early National
Speleological Society members dating to
1960. The current survey data shows the
cave at just over 4,000 feet long.
The Carbide Dump
Blue Ridge Grotto
September 2019, Vol. 54, Number 9
Come late August, conditions finally
improved enough for a dive of the down-
stream siphon in McClungs Cave. Aided
by a large team of sherpas to haul their 250
pounds of gear into the deep recesses of
the 18-mile long cave, Zeb Lily and Brian
Williams dove the sump on the 31st of
Brian Williams in the McClungs sump. Photo by Nikki Fox.
August. After traversing 160 feet and reach-
ing a depth of 16 feet, the duo surfaced in
around 700 feet of passage have been
Maxwelton Sink Cave, officially connect-
explored. The new discovery holds an incred-
ing the two major West Virginia caves. The
ible array of pure white flowstone formations,
joint cave system, which now stands at over
impressive see-through dog-tooth spar, and
41-miles long, will be known as The Great
dozens of delicate soda straws.
Savannah Cave System.
The Potomac Caver
The large borehole passage of
Potomac Speleological Club
Maxwelton Sink Cave's Echo River has
July-August 2019, Vol. 62, Number 3
been explored to its terminal sump, ending
Edgard Bertuat, Rick Royer and Scott
the direct upstream push in this section
Wahlquist spent an overnight camp trip
of the cave. However, several high leads,
in Memorial Day Cave exploring leads,
yet unexplored, are visible while traversing
eliminating one pit lead that dropped into
Echo River.
known passage, and doing a 40-foot aid
climb to a narrow canyon passage that was
IKC Update
left unsurveyed.
Indiana Karst Conservancy
September 2019, Number 134
Dropping into the 30-foot pit discovered
The Lowry Karst Preserve is the newest
on the last dig trip to Hammer Canyon in
property to come under the stewardship of
Shoveleater Cave, Mark Minton, Yvonne
the Indiana Karst Conservancy. The 6.66
Droms and the rest of their excavation team
acre property contains the large scenic
found themselves on the bottom of a blind
entrance to Lowry Cave, a mostly walking,
pit. Initial disappointment was overcome
2000-foot long stream cave.
when a higher level lead, taking a significant
amount of air, was discovered. While too
Passages
tight to progress a significant distance, falling
Springfield Plateau Grotto
water can be heard down this canyon lead,
September 2019, Vol. 14, Number 3
indicating it is likely a way back to the stream
Stephanie McCarty stumbled upon
passage that the Hammer Canyon dig has
Spargazer Pit earlier this year, however,
been following for several months.
the depths of the pit went unexplored until
recently. By the time cavers returned, the
Sag Rag
once narrow sink entrance had enlarged
Shasta Area Grotto
significantly, allowing easy passage to the
July-August 2019, Vol. 38, Number 4
formation-filled underground chambers.
Exploring Shasta County lava tube
At the bottom of the 82-foot pit, booming
entrances, a group of local grotto members
30-foot by 30-foot borehole takes off in
mapped into and documented Pink Comb
either direction. Several large rooms and
Cave and Loft Cave, while also conducting
a biological survey. Both caves measured at
over 250 feet long, with Pink Comb being
the larger and more decorated of the two.
The Region Record
Virginia Region of the NSS
Fall 2019, Vol. 32, Number 3
Despite a couple of false starts, Terry
McClanathan finally got back to Friars
Hole's Monster Caverns this past year
to tape the room's waterfall drop, an aid
climb accomplished by Bill Stone and Bob
Jeffreys in 1980. With the rigging still in
good condition, Terry ascended the drop and
measured it at 103 feet from the lower bolt,
effectively adding another 100-foot drop to
West Virginia's ever-growing list.
West Virginia Caver
West Virginia Grottos
October 2019, Vol. 37, Number 5
Probing the tight canyon lead above the
floor of the blind pit discovered on the last
Hammer Canyon dig in Shoveleater Cave,
Yvonne and Mark were able to shave away
the canyon walls and gain access to a climb-
able 20-foot pit that terminated on the edge
of an approximately 50-foot deep dome-pit.
The stream that was lost during the last dig
remerged in this new drop, issuing from the
pit's far wall. Without rope, the pit and a tall
canyon lead, visible across and halfway down
the pit, were left unexplored.
Ridgewalking with his friends at dusk
amongst a large West Virginia karst field,
Shawn Hogbin stumbled upon a set of sink-
hole entrance pits. Descending the larger of

---------- Page 43 ----------
the two pits that night, the group discovered
passage. Over 100 feet long and 70 feet tall,
Lost Innocence Cave, a mile long, nearly
the Entrance Hall holds a powerful waterfall,
200-foot-deep system. The 6,000 feet
and can be accessed through either of the
of passage in the bottom cave is typically
two surface pits, which measure 78 and 103
narrow and tall, with numerous switchbacks
feet deep respectively.
and interconnections. The Entrance Hall
is the cave's largest and most impressive
Aid climbing in Maxwelton Sink led
PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE
As 2019 comes to a close, the NSS
ship software. This has come at a cost as we
has had another challenging year. We had
work out some of the bugs and move our
an outstanding convention in Cookeville,
membership database over. The old NSS
Tennessee thanks to Maureen Handler
Track had outlived its useful life and had
and her outstanding staff. We also saw
many issues with ease of use, retention of
the production of the NSS Membership
records, etc. Hopefully, we will have solved
Directory. We have continued to experience
some of our autorenewal issues with the
an overall decline in membership in 2019.
software.
Part of this is the demographic trend across
We have also transitioned the NSS from
the nation. Most social and fraternal organi-
an Excel Spreadsheet accounting system
zations are seeing a decline, but I also see a
to QuickBooks. As you can imagine, the
reemergence of student grottos such as the
NSS has a very complicated bookkeeping
Aggie Speleological Society at Texas A&M.
system with many challenges, from manage-
On the science front, we're seeing more and
ment of our members' dues, managing an
more research being conducted on caves and
NSS Convention, and numerous dedicated
karst. Most notable are the excellent turnout
funds. Specifically, I want to extend a great
for the Geological Society of America (GSA)
appreciation to Gaylene Speaect, who has
karst sessions and the formation of the Karst
served for many years as the treasurer and
Division at GSA.
under whose direction the transition to
We have also wrestled with transition of
QuickBooks took place. Gaylene still serves
the NSS to the use of YM for our member-
as the Finance Officer for the National Cave
NEWS & NOTES
The William L. Wilson and Diane
tion materials is February 15, 2020.
C. Wilson Scholarship in Karst
Information on how to apply can be found
Science
at the Karst Waters Institute website (http://
Administered by the Karst Waters
Institute
www.karstwaters.org
CLASSIFIED ADS
The William L. Wilson and Diane
SPELEOBOOKS.COM 295 7978. Cave and
C. Wilson Scholarship in Karst Science
bat gifts, books, clothing and jewelry. Prompt
recognizes the significant contributions of
personal service since 1973.
the late William (Bill) L. Wilson, who tackled
West Virginia Cave Books
some of the most difficult karst science ques-
www.WVASS.org
tions in Florida and elsewhere through his
If your Grotto or Region is looking for new caves to
consulting company, Subsurface Evaluations,
explore in the Virginia area, RASS can offer your
group a place to camp in Bath County, VA. There
Incorporated. To stimulate the development
are more than 100 caves within an hour drive.
of new, energetic, motivated, and creative
We support cave conservation and education.
karst scientists and to remember Bill Wilson
Contact Jason Hart at JHARTCAVESVA@gmail.
and his dedication to karst science, the schol-
com
arship was established by Diane C. Wilson
The Richmond Area Speleological Society
in his memory. The scholarship includes a
(RASS) supports cave conservation, education
and research by offering grants to assist
one-time award of $1,000. The scholar-
ship is open to any student who is currently
AD RATES: Now based on the number of lines your ad takes up. It is a flat rate of $3 per line. As a guide, a
enrolled in, or has been accepted into, a
line holds 43-45 characters + spaces at our font and size. 10% discount for runs of 3 months or .Payment
master's degree program at an institution
must precede publication, but copy should be e-mailed to the editor (nssnews@caves.org), to reserve space.
Copy should be received one month prior to publication date (e.g., by May 1 for a June issue). Make checks
of higher education in the United States.
payable to the National Speleological Society and send to: Att: NSS NEWS ADVERTISING, 6001 Pulaski Pike NW,
This year's deadline for all applica-
Huntsville, AL35810.
to the discovery of Disappointment Pit, a
45-foot, blind pit, as well as several other
nearby highly decorated areas that prom-
ise further passage. During the process of
exploration, the largest free rappel in the
cave system was rigged, a 60-foot drop into
known passage.
Rescue Commission. Gaylene stepped down
as the NSS Secretary/Treasurer at the Fall
BOG meeting. THANK YOU for your many
years of service.
I also want to thank Mark Skove for
his years of service as the Operations
Vice President. This is also a challenging
position, being responsible for the NSS's
Headquarters building rentals and main-
tenance, supervising our wonderful staff,
bookstore operations, information technol-
ogy and the face of the Society with our
web page.
The Society would not be where it is
today without the dedicated hard work of its
many volunteers and in particular, its officers.
Thank you, Gaylene and Mark, for your years
of service and for a job well done.
Geary Schindel
NSS President
karstwaters.org/scholarship/). Additional
information can be had through email to Dr.
Janet S. Herman (jherman@virginia.edu).
projects aligned with these goals. To receive
a grant request application please email us at
rass-grants-committee@googlegroups.com.
Applications reviewed quarterly.
New WV Cave Books: Bulletin 20 Caves &
Karst of the Culverson Creek Basin, WV by
Lucas, Balfour, and Dasher. 336 pages, 364
caves, 208 photos, 80 maps. Color copy on
USB drive. $35 postpaid; Bulletin 21 Caves
and Karst of Mercer & Summers Counties,
WV by Schaer and Dasher. 186 pages, 226
caves, 131 photos, 62 maps. $25 postpaid.
WVASS, PO Box 200, Barrackville, WV 26559
WVASS@PrehistoricPlanet.com
