Santa Cruz Sea Cave, California
April 22, 1981

At around 3 p.m. on Wednesday, April 22, 1981, Ray Wilkerson(17), Mike
Hopwood(17) and Ivin Torres(16) entered a 75 foot cave in a cliff adjacent to the
ocean near Santa Cruz, California. One of them was supposed to remain above with
a rope, but joined the other two. They explored around for awhile, then tried to get
out. The tide had meanwhile started coming in and where they had waded in, it was
now deep water and breakers. They could swim as far as the entrance but could get
no purchase on the slippery rocks there. They retreated and began yelling for help.
At first there was no one to hear them, but at around 6.30 p.m. a UCSC student,
Jim Tessier, chanced by, saw the trapped cavers' shoes on the rocks below West
Cliff Drive, knew the dangerous cave was there and took a look. Hearing their cries,
he ran to a fire alarm box and summoned help.
Firemen arrived quickly, lowered a chain ladder and coaxed the victims up. The
tide, still coming in, had almost covered the entrance.
REFERENCE: Mark Bergstrom "Three Rescued in SC" Santa Cruz Sentinel
Thursday, April 23, 1981, p
ANALYSIS: Entering a cave in the face of a sure flood, in this case the tide, is
foolish. THe lure of adventure is strong especially for the young.

---

Harry Hole Hole, British Columbia, Canada
July 13, 1981

In the afternoon of Monday, July 13, 1981 Dean Peak(15) and two companions of
similar age were caving in Harry Hole Hole, a cave near Hankin Point not far from
Coal Harbour on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Canada. Peak was free
climbing at a waterfall when a handhold broke causing him to fall 25 feet to the
bottom.
One companion exited the 150 feet of passage, mostly crawlway, to get help while
the other descended and waited with the victim, who had suffered at least a six inch
gash on the side of his head, and was unable to do the climb necessary to get out of
the cave.
At Coal Harbour a single rescuer was obtained, Murray Reusch but when he was
brought back to the scene, the rope he had proved too short-additional help and
equipment would obviously be needed. Reusch descended and waited with the
victim.
Calls went to the local ambulance service, the RCMP, and the mine rescue team
from Island Copper. Jim Pelletier, an experienced caver was captain of the latter
which arrived at the cave entrance at 8 p.m. Monday evening. Those at the bottom
of the shaft had for some time been soaking wet from the spray of the waterfall and
the victim was becoming hypothermic.
Apparently a rope was rigged, the victim was fitted with Gibbs ascenders and
with a safety line (belay?) allowed to ascend the waterfall under his own power. He
also had to do the 150 feet of crawling to the entrance since there was insufficient
room to carry him. At the entrance he was transported in a basket litter down the
steep slope to the shore of Rupert Arm.
REFERENCE: Anon. "Mine Rescue Team Lifts Boy from Hankin Pt. Cave" North
Island Gazette (Port Hardy, B.C.) 16:48 Wednesday, July 15, 1981 8.
ANALYSIS: The cavers were poorly equipped and lacked experience. The lack of a
helmet-mounted light may have contributed to the fall. Without a helmet the victim
was lucky not to have suffered worse head injuries. The use of running shoes also
could have made climbing more difficult.

---

Roppel Cave, Kentucky
December, 1981

On a Sunday night in December, 1981 Win Wright, Carol Trexler, Ben Keller,
Philip Balister, and Bill Koerschner arrived at the Roppel Cave fieldhouse near
Mammoth Cave National Park in central Kentucky. There they encountered Tom
Miller, who was spending a week at the fieldhouse. The weather was cold with
freezing rain.
The following morning Miller entered first, on a solo recon and the group entered
an hour later, as heavy rain began. Both went in the new Weller Entrance.
The group became lost looking for their survey objective and spent hours in a
maze area. Once on the route the effect of the rains was made obvious at the Lower
Black River where "Foaming torrents of muddy ice water gushed in from every
available side passage." At the climb up into the BWOB Passage, now a waterfall,
they encountered Miller. They climbed an alternate route and Miller headed out.
At Fairyland they found their path blocked by a sump. They began their retreat.
About 1/2 hour from the Weller Entrance they ran into a wet and possibly worried
Tom Miller who reported the Weller Entrance to be sumped. This was not good.
The group had been on the go for 12 hours and was getting tired. They would now
have to head for the Main Entrance, four hours away, and find the bypass to the 35
foot drop which had been freeclimbed before by others.
When they reached Coalition Chasm, they found two 70 foot waterfalls plunging
down. Wright began making up a prussik rig while others looked for the bypass. In
an hour of exploring various levels they arrived at the top of the rope. Miller headed
for the entrance to try that climb while the rest tried to contact those below over the
roar of the falls. Miller climbed the entrance drop and lowered a cable ladder.
Vertical gear was obtained at the fieldhouse and everyone was soon out.
REFERENCE: Bill Koerschner "The Great Roppel Debacle" Tech Troglodyte
Winter, 1982 pp 73-75.
ANALYSIS: The group felt that without Miller's report on the Weller Entrance,
they might have been too tired to make it out. Miller reportedly admitted that
without the groups' knowledge of the Coalition Chasm bypass, they might not have
gotten out.

---

Sloan's Valley Cave, Kentucky
January 2, 1982

On January 2, 1982, a group of three returned from a trip into Sloan's Valley
Cave in Pulaski County, Kentucky, to find rain clouds moving in. They went back to
the Fieldhouse. At p.m. it started to rain.
The sign-out showed three inexperienced cavers had entered Left Cave at 6:30
p.m. and were thus not expected out until 2 a.m. Left Cave was known to flood, but
only under very heavy rain conditions. The rain volume gradually increased. At 9
p.m. the usually dry streambed north of the Fieldhouse had become a raging river.
A group headed for Left Cave at that point to get the cavers out if possible. The
cave was found not yet to be in flood and the group in question was quickly found.
The rain continued through the night and stopped the next morning. Evidence
indicated a 15 foot rise and the Duckunder, dry before, was sumped shut.
REFERENCE: Fred Anderson "The Sloan's Valley Flood" The Cave Crickett
Gazette 7:2 February, 1982 pp 16-17.
ANALYSIS: This shows the importance of signing out or leaving a note, but even
inexperienced cavers should have the sense to keep out of caves in bad weather.

---

Hennigh Cave, Pennsylvania
January 26, 1982

At p.m. on Tuesday, January 26, Gary Kuhn, a juvenile caver, part of a school
caving trip, became trapped in the entrance of Hennigh Cave near Park Forest
Junior High School near University Park, Pennsylvania. The campus patrol called
Will White at the University and at 3:30 p.m. he got a few cavers to investigate.
Meanwhile a school bus driver had involved himself and the Spring Mills Fire Dept.
had been called.
Hennigh Cave has two entrances, one a steep-sided sink 8 feet deep with a 20
foot free drop at the bottom, and the other a small, steeply sloping crawl to the
bottom of the 20 foot drop.
When the cave rescuers arrived, they found Kuhn in the sink with the school bus
driver positioned between him and the 20 foot drop. The two were tied together
with a one inch manila rope also attached to a tree. One caver from the university
climbed into the sink with a belay. He untied the manila rope and tied a haul line to
Kuhn with an "equalizing harness." At 4:30 p.m. Kuhn was hauled out followed by
the bus driver. Kuhn was cold but uninjured.
REFERENCES: 1) Art Petit "The Great Hennigh Cave Rescue" Nittany Grotto
News 29:1 Winter, 1981 pp 3-4.
2) Laurie Fedon "Boy Rescued from Cave" Centre Daily Times (State College, PA)
Thursday, January 28, 1982
ANALYSIS: Not much of an emergency. Kuhn was 5 feet tall weighing 250
pounds-this may have been why he was unable to make the ascent.

---

Patton Cave, West Virginia
January 30, 1982

On January 30, a group of eight cavers was in Patton Cave, Monroe County,
West Virginia. At the Football Room they got ready to do the 30 foot drop. Fred
Grady (33) felt a call to nature. Looking about, he found what he thought was an
ideal place, near the main passage up on a ledge. As he stood up to rearrange his
coveralls, he fell off the ledge. This was a drop of only 5 feet and though his chest
struck some rocks, he was only momentarily stunned and soon rejoined the rest of
the party.
Seven hours later, on leaving the cave, he started to feel some discomfort. An
x-ray showed he had only bruised ribs.
REFERENCES: 1) Fred Grady "Accident in Patton Cave" The Potomac Caver 25:3
March, 1982 p 37.
2) Fred Grady Personal Communication December 10, 1982.
ANALYSIS: No comment.

---

Sumidero Santa Elena, Puebla, Mexico
January 30, 1982

At about 2 p.m. on Saturday, January 30, 1982 a group of three cavers entered
Sumidero Santa Elena, adjacent to the town of Xochitlan in Puebla, Mexico. They
were Warren Anderson (late 20's), Bill Liebman (early 30's) and Dave Walker
(early 30's), part of a group of nine cavers exploring this cave which was expected
to connect to a resurgence cave three kilometers away. The sumidero had been
explored a little over two km from the entrance, past 24 short roped drops
(waterfalls) and 22 swims. When the exploration had begun, on January 12, stream
flow monitoring at the entrance showed six cfs entering. Past drop 8 there are two
tributaries which approximately double the main flow. On the 30th, with dry
weather since the 12th, the entrance flow had dropped to two cfs.
THe group proceeded past drop 24, to drop 25 and on to drop 26 where they
turned back. Moving steadily, they passed through the series of spouting waterfalls
(16-19) above drop 20 where one must negotiate an aid climb on the way down cave
to reach the first ledge past drop 15. If you continue down-cave without doing the
aid climb you quickly reach a cul-de-sac-a sure death-trap in a flood. With
Anderson in the lead, they continued up cave, doubtless relieved at having passed
through the section without ledges. At drop 14 Anderson ascended and began
recarbiding, waiting for the others. Suddenly, at about 1 a.m., there was a surge of
water noise. Thinking his ears were playing tricks, Anderson focussed his electric
on the nearby falls, in time to see a surge of foul, brown water. Walker and
Liebman, approaching drop 14 through chest deep water were caught. Walker
pushed off, thrashed his way to the rope and quickly made it up. Liebman held on to
the wall while Walker and Anderson jumped over to a ledge above him and lowered
a long Jumar sling. Liebman was pulled up.
The ledge they were on was spacious so they settled in to see what would happen.
The flow increased until the very walls were vibrating.
At about midnight there had occurred a torrential rain, which lasted for about 45
minutes, dumping 4 cm. The flow at the entrance had quickly swelled to some 20
cfs, then began to subside. The 20 cfs probably meant 40-50 cfs past drop eight
where tributaries normally doubled the entrance flow. Those on the surface were
alarmed but could do nothing. By dawn Sunday the flow was down to 7 cfs. At 8
p.m. Sunday no one had appeared so a group of three gathered medical and rigging
supples and headed in. The group was found at around 10 p.m., still on their ledge.
Everyone was out by a.m.
REFERENCE: Steve Knutson "Sumidero Santa Elena" NSS News 40:9 September,
1982 pp 236-245.
ANALYSIS: In the Xochitlan area, the weather is very changeable. The day of the
entrapment there was no visibly threatening weather. Since then a program of
keeping temperature/pressure records had yielded a pattern which probably would
have predicted the storm causing the entrapment. Also, it was expected that there
would be some warning signs in the cave before a flood hit. There were none. The
cavers are lucky they were not caught below drop 16.

---

Post Office Cave System, California
March 7, 1982

On March 7, 1982 a group of cavers obtained a permit at Lava Beds National
Monument to enter undeveloped caves beyond Post Office Cave in the Post Office
Cave System. Caves in the Monument are named as the portion of a system around
a certain entrance. The entrance to Post Office Cave had collapsed and a sign had
been placed in the passage leading to other parts of the system indicating that that
"cave" was closed.
The cavers entered the Silver Cave entrance to the system, proceeded past the
Post Office Cave closure sign and through a very low, tight crawl into the main Post
Office Cave. In trying to reach a lower level, one of the group fell receiving multiple
minor contusions and lacerations.
At around 1 p.m. Park Service personnel responded to a request for help but
arrived at the tight crawl into Post Office Cave as the victim was emerging. He had
been assisted to that point by members of his own group. He was taken to
Monument Headquarters for first-aid and released.
REFERENCE: Dennis Schram, James Sleznich, Richard Jones "Case Incident
Record" USDI, NPS, Lava Beds National Monument Unpublished Reports March
10, 1982 pp.
ANALYSIS:T accident party had proper equipment for rappelling but were
reportedly using it incorrectly, or not at all, at the time of the accident. It is felt by
the Park Service personnel that the incident would have become more serious if the
victim had not been able to negotiate the tight crawl himself. This might have
necessitated removal of the Post Office Entrance collapse.

---

Fisher Ridge System, Kentucky
March 20, 1982

On the morning of Saturday, March 20, the group of cavers at the Toohey Ridge
Fieldhouse formed up into three parties with various objectives in the Fisher Ridge
Cave near Mammoth Cave National Park in central Kentucky. Two groups would
use the Splash Entrance. Joe Saunders was leading Lou Simpson, Doug Stecko,
Tom Patterson and Bill Allendorf on their first Fisher Ridge trip. The second
included Peter Quick, Dan Crowl and Bruce Worthman. The third group was Larry
Bean, Fred Anderson and Barb Shaeffer using the Historic Entrance.
The Historic Entrance group exited at 11 p.m. and noted in so doing that the
Forecaster Dome water flow had greatly increased over what they had seen on the
way in. They debated whether or not to leave the Historic Route drops rigged in
case the Splash Entrance should sump. They decided to leave only the entrance
ladder rigged. When one of them checked the Fieldhouse they found Joe Saunders
and Tom Patterson who had just exited a sumping Splash Entrance. The Historic
drops were soon rerigged. Meanwhile Bill Allendorf, who had also gotten out
Splash, had stayed at that entrance to warn those remaining not to try the virtual,
but not quite, sump.
Joe Saunders' group had split up into groups of two and three and, the group of
three was mapping when they noticed the air flow stop. This had to mean that the
Splash Entrance had sumped. Since this was the only well known route to that
group, they stashed the mapping gear and headed out. Pressure Dome normally
dry, was now flowing a torrent SO they hurried on. At the lead the other faction of
their original group was doing they left a note. The three knew the Historic Route so
communication here was important.
At the Splash Entrance crawl series the three made it through with a minimum
three inches of air space and 15-20 feet of 4-6 inches, there was voice contact all the
way out. Outside they persuaded Allendorf to wait there to keep the other two,
Simpson and Stecko from taking the chances they had. Some time later a storm hit
and Splash was inundated by a three foot wall of water.
Meanwhile Simpson and Stecko had found the note and proceeded toward the
entrance. There they found the extra gear left by the others was gone so they
assumed them to be out. Suddenly there was a roar of water as the storm hit and the
entrance crawl completely sumped. Climbing onto a six foot ledge they tried a
crawlway but found it to dead-end, with water now flowing down it from the way the
had come! They retraced their path to the "main" passage. They were now
confused and blundered about in deep water before recognizing the correct passage
away from the flooding. Soon they slowed their panicked flight and made their way
back into Fisher Avenue. They did not know the Historic Route and so debated the
proper course of action. First they wrung out their wet clothes, putting them back
on, covered by their two emergency plastic bags. They had one carbide lamp
without a tip but fired it up anyway for warmth. They still feared flooding and were
nervous about trying to sleep.
At 3 a.m. lights approached from the north. This was Quick, Crowl and
Worthman, who knew the Historic Route. The combined group exited the Historic
Entrance a
REFERENCES: 1) BIII Allendorf, Barb Shaeffer and Lou Simpson "Trapped in
Fisher Ridge" The Cave Cricket Gazette 7:3 April, 1982 pp 27-31.
2) Joe Saunders "More on the Fisher Ridge Flood" Ibid. p 38.
3) Bruce Worthman "22 Hours in Fisher Ridge" Ibid. p 37.
ANALYSIS: It was overcast when the Splash groups entered but no rain or lightning
were evident and the forecast called for clearing by evening. The Splash was at
normal level. It had been used previously 15 times, but never in the rain. Later
observation showed it to be passable 30 hours after sumping and back to normal 1
1/2 days after that.

---

Haynes Cave, West Virginia
March 26, 1982

On March 26, 1982 Mark Johnsson and Pat Maurice entered Haynes Cave in
Monroe County, West Virginia. On the previous day they had finished a survey of
the cave and had returned to obtain geological data. After six hours in the cave they
were on the "lower level" about 50 feet south of the entrance.
Johnsson proceeded up an easy ten foot climb, which he had done twice before.
At the top the "ceiling and/ or wall failed." One large block shifted, temporarily
pinning Johnsson's chest against the top of the climb. A second block (3x2x1 foot)
bounded down the drop striking Maurice, who was ten feet laterally from the
bottom. The rock hit her on the right side, knocking her to the ground and causing
cuts and contusions. Johnsson freed himself and the two left the cave under their
own power. A hospital examination revealed no broken bones or major injuries.
REFERENCE: Mark Johnsson Accident Report Undated 1 p.
ANALYSIS: Johnsson relates that this is the second such incident in Haynes
Cave-in '77 a rock fell breaking the toe of a caver. He points out that the gypsum
in the cave is constantly forming in joints, exerting pressure and causing blocks to
loosen. This is true of any gypsum area in any cave.

---

Crooked Swamp Cave, New Jersey
March 27, 1982

On Saturday, March 27, a group of boy scouts of Troop 116 of Millstone Township
visited Crooked Swamp Cave in Sussex County, New Jersey. Their caving leader
was Jim Ewin, a caver of 30 years experience, but Ewin was suffering from a bad
cold and did not enter the cave. The bus driver and overall scout leader was Don
Weltner (48) a New Jersey State Trooper. Weltner's caving experience was very
limited-the only cave he was known to have visited before this trip was Shofer's
Cave near Kurtztown, Pennsylvania. He was reported to be in excellent physical
condition and was of average size-5 foot 11 inches, 160 pounds.
The group first looked at maps of the cave, discussing parts of the system,
including "difficult areas or places to avoid.' All but Ewin spent the morning in
small groups, exploring the constricted passages. Two other adults accompanied
the group but they had no caving experience. The 16 scouts ranged in age from 11
to 16 and about half had previous experience in Shofer's Cave.
Weltner was wearing a long-sleeved shirt and pants with rubber-soled boots. His
helmet had a chin strap but no mounted light. His main light source was a
hand-held flashlight.
The Crooked Swamp Cave has seven entrances but one is not enterable. It is
basically "a horizontal network of passages a few feet below the six base entrances
and fifteen feet below the sinkhole entrance." There is 1250 feet of surveyed
passage, principally low crawlway with some very high but narrow vertical fissures.
The traverse between some entrances is very difficult or impossible. Passage walls
are very irregular with jagged projections. The cave is normally 55-57 degrees but
its shallow nature and air movement coupled with cool weather and cold nights
rendered it cooler at the time of the accident.
Lunch was eaten outside and at that time it was proposed to have a "manhunt"
in the cave during the afternoon, with ice cream as the prize. Accordingly, three
scouts went in first, in an entrance of their choice to get "lost" and evade the
others. After ten minutes the others began the pursuit. Weltner with his two sons
and another scout went in an entrance just south of Tree Root Cave, a part of the
cave system that was connected on the map by dotted lines. Weltner was aware of
this but tried to force the connection anyway. At perhaps 3 p.m. (the time is
uncertain since Weltner first would not admit he was stuck) Weltner entered a
narrow, body-sized crevice, with a small ledge making it wider at the top. He
apparently slipped off this ledge and became wedged in the bottom of the keyhole.
At that point the passage is only a couple feet high and 7-8 inches wide below the
ledge. Weltner's head was downslope from his feet. For the coming rescue
attempt, it was difficult to reach his feet and impossible to reach his head, except
for a very small person, from the Tree Root Cave side.
Shortly after 3 p.m. all but Weltner's group had grown cold and left the cave. An
adult, waiting on the surface entered at 3:20 and learned that the victim was stuck.
A rope was obtained and one end looped around Weltner's feet. Pulling had no
effect. At 4:50 one scout braced the victim's feet and he was able to move forward 9
to 12 inches, until his pants crotch snagged. The victim was already slipping into
hypothermia as his speech had become slurred.
It was thought to lever him up to free him but no suitable board could be found.
From 4:45 to 5:30, outside rescuers were contacted, including the Blue Ridge
Rescue Squad and NCRC. The Rescue Squad notified the New Jersey State Police
who were naturally very concerned and came in force.
t 7:30 p.m. Weltner had become somewhat incoherent and it was recommended
that heat was needed. From that point, numerous attempts to warm the victim were
made but none were successful. These included hot water bottles, gel packs
(chemical heat), a sheet soaked in hot water, a portable electric heater, and a
portable hot-air generator for telephone work in manholes.
By 1 a.m. Sunday, it became clear "that all attempts to stabilize Weltner's
condition by application of heat had not arrested his slide into hypothermia.' Yet
another attempt at pulling him back yielded no result and at 3 a.m. there was no
sign of life from the victim. At 6 a.m. a rescuer was able to get close enough to
detect residual body heat at mid-thigh.
At 6 a.m. it was decided that ordinary extraction would not work and the
go-ahead was given to use "extraordinary" means. This led to a 20 foot shaft being
drilled to intercept the cave two feet from Weltner. Twelve hours later, it was found
that the shaft intercepting the cave has missed the correct spot by 10-12 feet. From
about 6:30 p.m. Sunday to midnight on Monday/Tuesday cavers worked to enlarge
the passage from the shaft to Weltner. A jackhammer, hydraulic rock splitter, and
explosives were used. Finally, early Monday evening, a harness was fitted around
Weltner's chest and he was moved two feet toward the shaft. He could not be
moved further, however, and at midnight it was decided to remove the victim by
quarrying.
Quarrying commenced at 2 a.m. The work involved blasting, backhoe work and
drilling and Weltner received a number of post-mortem injuries in the process. His
body was recovered at 11:40 p.m. Tuesday.
REFERENCES: (Newspaper references are representative, not complete) 1) AP
"Scout Leader Trapped in Cave, Feared Dead" Philadelphia Enquirer Monday,
March 29, 1982 pp 1-A, 8-A.
2) AP "Efforts to Save Spelunker Fail" The Patriot (Harrisburg, PA) Monday,
March 29, 1982 pp 1,2.
3) Anon. "Hopes Dim for Trooper In Cave" Tulsa World Monday, March 29, 1982 p
A 14.
4) Editor "Rescue Crews Try New Tactics in Cave" The Atlanta Journal March 30,
1982.
5) Jim Norman and Sam Rosensohn" Breakthrough, but Hopes Fade for Cop in
Cave" New York Post Tuesday, March 30, 1982 3.
6)AP "Blasting Tried to Free Trooper" The Oregonian (Portland, OR) Wednesday,
March 31, 1982 p A11.
7) AP "Body of N.J. Trooper Removed from Crevice" Philadelphia Enquirer
Thursday, April 1, 1982.
8) Bob Matusik Personal Communication April 3, 1982.
9) Ed. "New Jersey Tragedy" D.C. Speleograph April, 1982.
10) Ed. "Trapped Scoutmaster Dies of Hypothermia" The Potomac Caver 25:4
April, 1982 53.
11) Warren Hall "Letter to the Editor" D.C. Speleograph June, 1982 pp 17-18 (also
Editor's reply).
12) Editorial Untitled Northeastern Caver Spring, 1982 pp 38-40.
13) Editor "Untitled Rescue Report" Speleothemes July-August, 1982 10 pp.
14) Warren Hall "The Crooked Swamp Cave Incident" Northeastern Caver 14:1
January, 1983 pp 3-19 (Also, in slightly edited form in NSS News 41:5 May, 1983 pp
144-149).
15) Richard F. Dalton et al. "Crooked Swamp Caves # 2-3-7" Caves of New Jersey
Bulletin 70 New Jersey Dept. of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Geology and
Topography June, 1976 pp 20-23.
ANALYSIS: When Weltner's body was finally removed, it was reported that a
"piece of rock behind Weltner's right hip had acted as a keystone, thwarting efforts
to move him.' Even when quarrying removed the cave from 3/4 of his body a
come-along was required to completely free him. It is obvious in hind-sight that all
the attempts to pull him back from his entrapment were futile. At the same time,
though some efforts were made to warm the victim, none were successful, and it
seems from the reports that getting the victim free was foremost in people's minds.
And why shouldn't it be? Yet it must be recognized that there are some rescue
situations which are better served by maintaining the victim, then effecting his
evacuation or extraction when the means are obtained or discovered. Thus, if at
first Weltner's rescuers had decided that keeping him warm was to be the primary
objective, and the means had been thus obtained-perhaps a very effecient forced
hot air blower-Weltner might still be alive. This, of course, is hindsight and not
meant to belittle the efforts of rescuers, merely to suggest procedures for the
future.
The responsibility for this accident rests squarely on Weltner himself. He is
characterized as venturesome and "daring.' "In a cave he couldn't get his fill and
tackled small passages or difficult spots without apparent fear or hesitation."
Besides this, Jim Ewin suggests the following to have contributed to the situation:
1) The challange of the game of hide and seek they had devised, 2) a desire to
redeem himself for having failed to get through a small passage that morning, 3)
the impassable nature of the crawl, which he may have forgotten or been misled
about by voices ahead, and 4) the great danger of tight passages, of which he was
unaware.
To these I certainly agree. Indeed, the whole thrust of their outing was wrong,
teaching the young scouts and potentially future cavers to be daring-that caves
are places to play games in-instead of teaching them caution and good judgement.
As with climbing, in caving one must learn one's limits. Forcing a tight passage
may be heroic and noteworthy, but it can also be fatal. What goes in doesn't
necessarily come back out.

---

Nita Nanta, Oaxaca, Mexico
April 16, 1982

In April of 1982 a group of 17 cavers was on the Huautla Plateau working on
Sistema Huautla, a group of vertically-oriented, very deep caves, which are
hydrologically, and in some cases physically, connected.
On Friday, April 16, six members of the expedition left to return to the United
States. At five entered Nita Nashi for a one day push from the surface. Four,
Ed Holladay, Mark Minton, Doug Powell (late 20's) and Lisa Wilk were to break
camp at -600 meters in Nita Nanta and return to the surface that day. This left two
on the surface.
At about 11:30 a.m. Minton and Wilk started out followed by Powell and
Holladay. Past the "blasted area," a tight place where they had to unpack and pass
gear through, Powell took the lead.
At the 22nd drop, leading to the Narrows, he chose to free climb, with a single
Jumar on the rope, sliding it along as he climbed, for a safety. At 5 p.m., partway
up, Powell had a handhold for his left hand above his head when his foothold(s)
broke. The safety sling was not quite tight and his weight plus that of his camp
duffel (at least 30 lbs) came suddenly on his left arm, dislocating his left shoulder.
There was no immediate pain so he lowered himself to a ledge and called for
Holladay. Holladay arrived and made two unsuccessful attempts to reset the
shoulder. When Wilk and Minton arrived they moved back down two narrow drops
to a somewhat wider place, some 6Wx12Lx10H, and set up a bivouac at about
-330m on the stream-gravel floor. Further attempts to reset the shoulder were
unsuccessful. Sleeping bags were set up on a space blanket and ensolite pads, with
the cave stream flowing through the gravel under the space blanket. Wilk was left
with Powell while Minton and Holladay headed for the surface.
Two hours later, on the surface, they found only Mike Doe, Ted Wilson and
Allejandro Villagomez, an experienced caver from Mexico City. Several days worth
of food, a stove and stove fuel were packed up and transported to the bivouac by
Doe and Villagomez, arriving early Saturday morning.
Powell's shoulder had begun to hurt badly and he was unable to sleep. Some
relief was gained through occasional massaging of the shoulder by Wilk. When the
first surface relief arrived, Codeine was administered but did not entirely relieve
the pain. Doe had a book that showed how to reset a dislocation but two or three
attempts were unsuccessful. Then Doe stayed with the victim while Villagomez and
Wilk headed out.
The crew from Nita Nashi had exited and were briefed on the situation by the
others. Since Powell's condition was stable, they got some rest to be ready if
manpower was needed for an evacuation. Minton and others took the expedition
bus to Huautla to get additional pain killers and a doctor's instructions on how to
reset the shoulder.
Saturday afternoon Holladay and Wilson took additional drugs and food and
stove fuel to the bivouac. Powell's morale was by now a little low. His left knee,
which he noticed as feeling sore the day before, was now red and swollen,
extremely painful to the slightest touch. Vallium was injected for the shoulder and
two hours later they attempted to reset it with no success. Holliday and Doe then
exited the cave leaving Wilson with Powell. Vallium was injected every 12 hours
and this allowed some sleep.
Meanwhile plans were made in case Powell could not make it out under his own
power-calls were made to the United States to establish a rescue liaison and a call
was made to Mexico City which would produce a doctor the following morning.
On Sunday afternoon Hans Bodenheimer, Mike McWhirter and Scott Davis
proceeded in to the bivouac. Bodenheimer had been present at a previous occasion
when Powell had dislocated the same shoulder and had it reset. When they arrived,
muscle relaxants and antibiotics were administered. After two hours, with
Bodenheimer and McWhirter in the proper positions and exerting all their
strength, two attempts were made before the shoulder reset with a loud "pop."
Only a dull ache remained. After a meal, however, chills set in and it became
obvious that the infected knee was a serious problem, though the victim was now
able to sleep.
On Monday the doctor, Artur Pareja Reyes, accompanied by Villagomez and
Wilk, headed in to treat the infected leg. Four other Mexican cavers, two from the
police and two from ISSSTE (Fire Department) had also arrived but were kept with
the surface crew. Pain killers were administered, the arm and leg immobilized with
heavy bandaging, and the victim started out under his own power with some
assistance from his companions.
After four hours and six drops the heavily medicated Powell needed to sleep, so
another bivouac was set up and eight hours of sleep obtained, at least by Powell.
Fortunately the drops above the accident bivouac were well suited to the Texas
method that Powell was forced to use, having only one usable arm and leg. He
reached the surface at about 6 p.m. on Tuesday, April 20. The normal three hour
trip had taken 14 hours.
REFERENCES: 1) Doug Powell Personal Communication May, 1982 pp
2) Bill Steele Personal Communication May 15, 1982 pp.
3) Scott Davis Personal Communication Undated 2 pp.
4) Chris Kerr "Nanta Rescue" Speleotype 15:2 1982 pp 21-27.
5) Editor Untitled Texas Caver June, 1982 p 55.
ANALYSIS: This sort of accident could happen to anyone but Powell might be more
prone to shoulder dislocations since he had suffered one previously. If one has a
disability that can recur "spontaneously" one might be careful to avoid situations
that could lead to its recurrence. In this case, using his ascending rig instead of
free-climbing should have prevented the accident. Carrying a load could lead to a
shoulder dislocation in anyone if they are forced to hold with one hand when
footholds break.
It is fortunate that Powell could leave under his own power-the consensus
seems to be that an evacuation from this cave, with it's many tight places, would
have been very difficult and time-consuming.

---

Buddy Penley's Cave, Virginia
April 17, 1982

At about 1 p.m. on Saturday, April 17, four cavers entered Buddy Penley's Cave
in Bland County, Virginia. These were Bill Kelly, Mike Moore, Pete Sauvigne (31)
and Bob Ulfers (20), from Virginia Polytechnic Institute. Sauvigue was by far the
most experienced and was playing the role of leader.
They proceeded down the 120 foot pit, the 30 foot cable ladder drop and the
Crossover Pit. After exploring a bit, looking for a connection to Newberry's Cave,
they started out. The trip in had taken four hours. At the 120 foot pit the noise of the
waterfall had about doubled but they had planned for this (rain was expected) by
rigging that drop so that one could get off at a constriction 90 feet up and serve as a
relayer of communications as the rest came up.
Sauvigne asked Moore to go up and fill this role. At about 5:15 p.m. he had
reached the constriction and moved up over the edge and to the left to rig into the
excess of the 200 foot rope used to rig the drop. At that point a 30 pound rock fell,
presumably dislodged by Moore although he didn't notice such an occurrence.
Below, Sauvigne was at the rope helping Ulfers put on his vertical rig. The rock,
"the size of a football," struck a blow to Ulfers' helmet, then to Sauvigne's arms
and finally Ulfers' foot. Ulfers' helmet was knocked off by the blow and when Ulfers
fell to the floor he struck his head, suffering further head and neck injuries. Both of
Sauvigne's arms were broken and Ulfers was knocked unconscious.
Sauvigne yelled for Moore to get help. Moore communicated that he would and
took off. Toward the entrance the cave is complex and Moore had to take his time
and several times chose wrong at a junction, retracing his steps after reaching a
dead-end. His carbide lamp went out at one point, but was not difficult to relight.
He reached the entrance about an hour and a half after the accident. Calls to the
VPI Cave Club and NCRC got the rescue started.
Meanwhile Kelly, who had been nearby, recharging his lamp, took charge of the
injured cavers. Ulfer's neck injuries kept them from moving him. In the drafts at
the bottom of the drop hypothermia became a problem. Ulfers was unconscious for
about 10 minutes-when he came to he experienced nausea and rolled over a bit to
vomit. Kelly took this opportunity to put some insulation under him. Using plastic
bags and carbide lamps he then kept Ulfers as warm as possible. Both Sauvigne
and Ulfers were in great pain. They passed the time in theological discussion.
At 9:15 p.m. the first of the rescuers arrived at the cave. At 9:30 a group entered
to bring medical supplies/expertise and a sleeping bag to the victims. Then a team
entered to lay phone line. By 10:40 p.m. a phone line was set up to the accident site.
After an initial examination, Ulfers appeared to have a scalp laceration, but no
skull fracture; the shoulder pain seemed to indicate a broken clavical. He
complained of pain in his left side and shoulder. His pupils were equal and reactive.
Sauvigne was cold and appeared to have fractures of both forearms.
While the victims were treated, the pit was rerigged for hauling and to bypass a
narrow crawlway just above the pit. In the process it was found that the new rig site
was somewhat unstable so there was some rock-fall danger.
The medical team with the victims called for a special, flexible backboard, a
KED, for Ulfers. This went down the drop at about midnight. At 12:43 a.m. Kelly
was sent up the 120 foot drop. Meanwhile the best route to the entrance had been
chosen and rigging was going on along this.
At 4:20 a.m. Ulfers was brought up the 120. After being checked by the med
techs he was transported to the entrance by a variety of caver-rescuers. He reached
the entrance at 6:35 a.m. Sauvigne was being hauled up the 12 at that time and was
transported to the entrance shortly after.
Ulfers was flown to a hospital where he was listed in serious condition with
a
depressed skull fracture, two hairline fractures of the cervical spine and a broken
foot. Sauvigue was found to have an open fracture of the left forearm and a
compound fracture of the right forearm.
REFERENCES: 1) Pete Sauvigne Personal Communication August 30, 1982.
2) Robert Rubin "Two Injured Cave Explorers Rescued From Bland Cavern"
Roanoke Times April 19, 1982 pp A-1, 8.
3) Caroline Kane "Two Rescued From Bland Cave" Virginian Leader (Pearisburg,
Virginia) April 21, 1982 pp 1, 12.
4) Chris Peacock "Saved" Roanoke Times April 28, 1982.
5) Detlef Ulfers "Accident in Buddy Penley Cave" The Potomac Caver 25:5 May,
1982 71.
6) Betty Moss "Rescue" Bat Times 2:1 p 12.
7) Editor "Buddy Penley Rescue" Tech Troglodyte Spring, 1982 pp 113-118,
122-124.
8) Robert Logan "Cave Rescue" Letter to Editor Roanoke Times Monday April 26,
1982 A-6.
ANALYSIS: There was a good deal of useful comment about this accident in the
caver press. Sauvigne admits to being "impatient to exit the cave" such that he
helped Ulfers rig in 1) while someone was still climbing above, and 2) directly in the
rockfall path, where he had experienced rockfall before. Apparently they could
have rigged in at a spot sheltered from rockfall.
Ulfers points out that your helmet does not provide complete safety from rockfall.
Certainly it saved his life-the MSA Comfo-cap experienced a collapsed suspension
but the shell was intact. Still, the helmet was knocked from his head allowing
further injuries when he struck the ground. Helmets should not come off in the
process of an accident, and one should change or modify the chinstrap accordingly.
Moss suggests that the presence of Kelly as an additional party member, able to
stay with the victims and offer assistance, may have saved them from succumbing
to hypothermia.
In all, a good example of the power of a simple rockfall to wreak havoc, and of the
necessity of a good caver-manned rescue network. For me, at least, it is easy to
think of times I've braved rockfall just to speed things up a little.

---

Huccacove Cave, Colorado
April 26, 1982

At on Saturday, April 26, a group of four or five entered Huccacove Cave,
near Cave of the Winds in Colorado. Some distance into the cave an argument
commenced. James May (21) became angry and told the others to leave him-he
would find his own way out! He had "three flashlights with extra batteries and
(was) dressed in a shirt and jeans, kneepads and sneakers." He had, thus, no food,
water or extra clothes. His companions took his request seriously and left.
On Sunday he had not appeared so they re-entered the cave and after some time,
spied his light. They called out but May's response was to turn his light out. THey
left the cave at about 6 p.m. Two of the party were injured in a fall down the steep
slope outside and required the assistance of El Paso Search and Rescue. None of
the group told the rescue personnel of their crazed companion, still in the cave.
May's mother, however, heard of this accident, realized her son was missing and
informed the El Paso Sheriff's department.
At about midnight, Sunday night, two Search and Rescue personnel, the
manager of Cave of the Winds, and four cavers from the Air Force Academy
entered the cave to find May. Only the Cave of the Winds manager had been in the
cave before. In five hours they searched all the cave on the map they possessed
without finding the victim.
At around noon on Monday, Barney Foster, who had heard of the situation on the
TV news, entered the cave to continue the search. He knew the cave well and
planned to check the upper rear portion which had not been searched. Search and
Rescue would not pursue the matter with him since May was known to disappear
for two or three days at a time but always turned up. No other cavers were
available.
Foster proceeded through a slot ("Steve tried and died") at the back, across a
crevice (leading to the lower area of the cave, already checked) and up into a series
of tight squeezes to the upper part of the cave. At the first of these squeezes he
found a flashlight. Past two small rooms he entered a room with large breakdown
blocks. Here he heard a cough, yelled, got a response and crawled into another
room where he found May, lying on the floor. May had burned everything but his
pants and sneakers to keep warm, and was covered with bruises and scrapes.
Foster gave him an energy bar and some water and they left the cave. May had
been lost in the cave for 54 hours.
REFERENCES: 1) Editor "Notes and News" Caving in the Rockies May-June,
1982 p 34.
2)Barney Foster "Rescue in Huccacove Cave" Caving in the Rockies July-October,
1982 pp 47-48.
ANALYSIS: Foster reports that May was drinking on the way to the cave. Certainly
his reported behavior was very bizarre. When found he was somewhat irrational
and surely hypothermiated. Perhaps he went from the irrationality of drinking
directly to the irrationality of hypothermia and never had the sense to contact his
would-be rescuers. He told Foster of "dreaming of climbing over a stone slab roof
of a house and the police were chasing him.'
There is now better awareness of the necessities of cave rescue by the Search and
Rescue personnel at El Paso and better coordination with cavers. May owes his life
to Foster's dedication.

---

Paul Penley Cave, Virginia
Spring, 1982
In Paul Penley Cave a promising lead was a dome/pit beyond the tight Fender
Bender. The dome/pit is intersected by the entering passage and has a stream
cascading down. A couple of attempts got a bolt ladder part way up above the
belayer but the waterfall lead was on the opposite side and still above. In the spring
of 1982 a light set of scaling poles was constructed and brought to the site by five
cavers. This was set up with it's bottom anchored to the top of the bolt ladder and
it's top over the lip of the waterfall above. A cable ladder had been attached to the
top before erection and ascent was then possible.
With a belay running back through the 'biners on the bolts, Ed Devine climbed
out and up the cable ladder, soaked from the waterfall, but still warm from his
exertions and a "garbage bag undershirt" he was wearing. He made it up the 15
foot climb quickly and checked for continuation. A high canyon passage led on but
the loose rock slope above the falls was very treacherous. Undoing his belay, he
headed on, finding some good leads.
Back at the dome he looked about for a permanent anchor for his descent and
future ascents. There was nothing! The walls were crumbly and the floor was loose
rocks that kept sliding down and over the edge as he walked on it. He would have to
descend with no upper belay-a slip would produce a 30 foot fall, hopefully held at
that point by his belayer.
He was about 10 feet down when the shower of water doused his carbide lamp.
He scrounged through his pack and found his flashlight, then got a few steps
further before the flashlight slipped from his grasp and was lost into the darkness
below. His third source, a Tekna-lite tied to his equipment sling now refused to
work.
The cold shower and his exertions were draining his strength fast. He tried to
reascend but found his belay to be tangled in the ladder. His boots, with speed
lacing hooks, tended to get caught in the cables of the ladder. He was cold and
confused. He yelled for light-he had to rescue himself, he knew that much.
Seconds passed.
A light suddenly shone upwards from a companion who had hung out over the
edge in a difficult spot to illuminate him. He got the rigging and his boots
untangled, his companion burned through a parachute cord equipment-passing line
which was tangled and he was suddenly free to descend. Almost at the bottom, his
strength failed and he fell free, but was pulled up to the passage by his
companions, where he collapsed, exhausted and numb, shivering uncontrollably.
He shortly recovered and the party was able to leave the cave without further
incident.
REFERENCE: Ed Devine "Diddly does the Undone Dome" Tech Troglodyte (VPI
Grotto) Winter, 1983 pp 40-46.
ANALYSIS: Surely here we are getting down to the very essence of what
adventurous sport caving is all about. A classic situation which any hardcore might
hope experience in his caving life. However, for those of more pedestrian
inclination we can suggest that a wetsuit, electric headlamp and boots without
speed lacing hooks would have eliminated some of the excitement. Also, the
vertical set-up, though it accomplished the job, was complicated, with scaling pole,
belay line, cable ladder and parachute cord equipment line all going to the top,
available for tangling.
Even with better equipment, however, don't underestimate the heat(life)-
sapping power of water, even in spray form. A climb like this is very serious caving.

---

Sunnyside Cave, Pennsylvania
Spring, 1982
In the Spring of 1982 a Cornell Outing Club group including Dan Gasteiger,
Melanie Hayes and Lon Kissinger was exploring in Sunnyside Cave, Centre
County, Pennsylvania.
At about 8:30 p.m., while exiting the cave, Kissinger found he could not ascend
the cable ladder past the tight spot on the first drop. His companions tried to help
him but soon realized they were too few and too tired. They "made the victim
warm," gave him their extra food, and left to seek help.
John Coraor of the Nittany Grotto was called and he organized one rescue team
while Will White was called to standby, organizing a second team. The initial team
left for the cave at 10:30 p.m. and arrived on the scene at 11:30.
One rescuer descended the ladder already in place (on belay) while another
remained above the squeeze to rig a second ladder with rungs "slightly offset"
from the first to enable the victim to take short steps while going through the tight
place. The victim started up but found, at the squeeze, that variation in rung
spacing made them even at that point. They then resorted to brute force, with the
rescuer above pulling and the one below pushing and giving footholds. The victim
was out by 1:30 a.m.
REFERENCE: Editor "Cave Rescue in Sunnyside Cave, Bellefonte, Centre County,
PA" Nittany Grotto News 29:2 Spring, 1982 pp 24-25.
ANALYSIS: It was pointed out that Sunnyside Cave is a poor choice for cavers not
experienced in negotiating narrow places on a cable ladder. With any vertical
technique, know it well and it will serve you well. I also feel that groups should have
some knowledge of self-rescue and be able to work their way out of simple
difficulties like this.
The call out was on a Friday night and difficulty was experienced in contacting
rescuers.

---

Ogle Cave, New Mexico
May 16, 1982

On Saturday, May 16, 1982 five cavers entered Ogle Cave in Carlsbad Cavern
National Park in New Mexico. After four hours of exploring, they began to ascend
the 185 foot entrance drop. The second caver going up, Terry Hill (25), was 75 feet
from the surface and 35 feet above a sloping ledge that interrupts the drop, when a
rock dislodged from a point 20-30 below. The rock, estimated to be "between 60-70
lbs" and "the size of a car tire," struck the ledge and broke into several pieces
which showered on those below. Everyone dove for shelter and no one was hit. The
rope was checked by Hill for damage and there was no further incident.
REFERENCE: William Bentley "Incident, New Mexico, Ogle Cave" Unpublished
Report April, 1983 p.
ANALYSIS: The rope had been anchored for convenience to an old donkey engine
bolted to the bedrock near the pit. The wall down to the ledge at this point "is
exfoliating and in spots (is) unstable and loose." The group recognized that the
rope should be rigged at some other point to avoid this part of the drop. Areas of
loose rock should always be avoided. If any other anchor point was available, the
first man down should have asked for the rope to be re-rigged, assuming he did not
already know of the rotten wall.
On ascent, if a rock is dislodged and may have damaged the rope below a caver,
the safer thing to do is to pull the rope up, inspecting it (as was done here), or
rappel back down, watching for rope damage, rather than make those below ascend
at their own risk.

---

The Cave, Belize
May 28, 1982

On May 27, 1982, while on a caving trip to Belize, Tom Miller and Logan McNatt
traveled from Blue Creek, a small Indian village, to the even smaller village of
Santa Elena. From that point they packed for an extended stay and walked the two
hours to The Cave. They had been to this cave once before, entering for 250 meters
to a drop into a huge room. The entrance is a river sumidero but in May the river
was sinking two miles upstream.
They set up a camp inside the entrance and slept the rest of the night.
The following day, Friday, May 28, they awoke to the start of very heavy rains.
Feeling this was no big deal they began mapping the cave.
At the drop, they rigged cable ladders, needing 45 feet. The room proved to be
some 200 feet across and 100 feet high. A small lake lay below the drop with a small
tributary stream coming out of one wall. Unfortunately they could find no
productive way to continue. One lead produced a climb-up to another entrance and
a high-level bypass back to the drop into the big room. They descended this a
second time, determined to find a good continuation. There was plenty of evidence,
large logs and rounded rocks, to indicate this room sometimes flooded, as much as
30-40 feet above the floor.
Leaving their cave packs under the drop they headed around the lake to check the
tributary. As they did this they heard a "strange roaring sound," which was soft
enough to be attributed to a "change in acoustics" but 15 seconds later it changed
to a rumble, then "a most horrendous Crash-boom!" The result was deafening and
the room seemed to shake. Obviously the river bed was in flood and climbing out
was now impossible.
In 30 seconds they had scrambled to the lead that allowed a climb-up to the
additional entrance they had found earlier, and were soon out. Back at the original
entrance, their camp was gone, taken by the fast, brown waters.
Two days later they returned and recovered some of their gear.
REFERENCE: Logan McNatt "Grim Fairy Tales" The Texas Caver 27:4 1982 pp
67-69, 72, 83.
ANALYSIS: In Mexico/Central America the rainy season begins in May or June.
On May 28 it should be expected. To explore a river sumidero (even a dry one) after
obvious rain had begun is taking a terrible risk. The cavers were lucky to have
found a second entrance just prior to the flood.

---

Leviathan Cave, Nevada
May 30, 1982

On Memorial Day Weekend in 1982, a group of six, Bob Richards, Pete Shifflett,
Keith Sinn, Chuck Whitney, Ed Moody and Curt Wheeler set out to visit Leviathan
Cave, high on the side of Worthington Mtn. in Nevada. At about 9 a.m. on Sunday,
May 30, they began the hike from their camp up to the large entrance. This hike
included a 30 foot pitch on which some desire a belay.
The group arrived at the entrance between 12:30 and 1 p.m. and ate lunch before
entering. A 50 foot rope was rigged on the entrance drop, a 30 foot climbable pitch.
At about 1:10 p.m. Ed Moody (37) stood up, fainted and fell down this pitch,
landing face down. Wheeler and Shifflett down climbed at once to Moody. He
appeared to be unconscious and was having trouble breathing. Sinn and Whitney
had the most medical training so they elected to stay with the victim while two of
the other three went for help. At about 1:25, Moody regained consciousness,
complaining of extreme pain in his back and having a wheeziness in his breathing.
At 1:55 the two arrived at camp and left to get help. At a ranch they found no one
and continued on to the town of Rachel, a few trailers and a Bar and Grill. The
owners of the Bar and Grill had a phone number for a helicopter rescue service
called "Flight for Life," which was quickly mobilized. At the cave, Moody
appeared to be dying.
At 4:45 p.m. a chopper arrived, rearranged personnel and headed for the
mountain at 4:50. At the cave entrance the chopper was unable to land, because of
the excess weight. A nurse, Marshall and medical/rescue supplies, including a
litter, were disembarked while hovering at the entrance and the choppen headed for
a nearby mine to refuel for the hop to Las Vegas.
Moody was put in the litter, pulled up the 30 foot pitch and given an IV and
oxygen. Everything was readied for the pick-up. At 6:45 the chopper hovered while
the victim was placed aboard. Within minutes he was at a Las Vegas hospital.
Moody spent the following two days in the Critical Care Unit having suffered a
ruptured spleen, a punctured lung and seven cracked ribs.
REFERENCES: 1) Bob Richards "Flight for Life" The Explorer (So Cal Grotto)
August, 1982 pp 129-133.
2) Ed Moody "And Now a Word from the Victim" ibid. p 133.
3) Ed Moody Personal Communication December 14, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Moody was wearing his hard hat for the hike and suffered no head
injuries in his fall. The fainting spell was due to the hike up to 8,000 feet, squatting
down and abruptly standing up. Moody has recovered and resumed caving, minus
his spleen.

---

Parker's Pit, Indiana
June 12, 1982

On Saturday, June 12, a group of Windy City Grotto cavers visited Parker's Pit,
Harrison County, Indiana, arriving at 11 a.m. This was the annual novice vertical
trip, with Parker's the objective because of the drizzle, Parker's having a more
secure lip than the original objective, Jug Hole.
Bob Paterno rigged the low side of Parker's, a 105 foot drop with 330 feet of PMI.
This ran to the right of a six inch diameter tree at the lip and back 50 feet to the rig
point, a tree. A rope pad was rigged to a Jumar on the main line about five feet from
the lip. There was insufficient webbing to rig the pad to a tree.
At the top, everyone was getting their rappel rigs on while Ralph Earlandson, the
most experienced, was helping a novice to construct a climbing system. Greg
Valent, the third experienced vertical caver, headed for Borden's Pit, 300 feet
away, to rig it.
Ted Hartman (32) got his gear on, and went to the rope. He pulled the rope up
four or five feet, to get below the Jumar, and applied a rack, using all five bars.
While doing this he did not at any time inform Earlandson, the only really
experienced one left on top, that he was getting ready to descend.
As he tried to back down the slope toward the lip, he had trouble getting the rope
to move through the rack. Bill Watts, who was watching, suggested removing a
bar. This was done but he was still struggling back toward the lip, feeding rope
through the rack. At the lip, he jammed the bars up, readjusted the pad, and
stepped down to a ledge three feet below the lip. It was now 11:30 a.m.
Leaning back at a 30 degree angle, he tugged on the rack with both hands,
spreading the bars. Suddenly his feet slipped off the ledge precipitating him into an
uncontrolled descent. Watts saw the fall and yelled "Belay!"
On the bottom, Paterno "heard something" then the "zip" of the fall. He
grabbed for the rope, and started to pull in slack. The rope became tight in his
hands at the same time as Hartman hit the bottom.
The victim came to rest with the rack supporting the upper part of his body about
ten inches above the floor. There was no movement. His eyes stared straight ahead.
Paterno ran to him, held up his head and called to him. After a minute Hartman
groaned; after five minutes he became coherent and tried to sit up. Paterno stopped
him and checked for "motor control" in all four extremities. Then he helped him
out of the fall line.
To get a better opinion on injuries, Paterno yelled to to those above to send
Watts, a CPR, down. Watts came down and checked the victim who appeared to be
OK except that he was in pain and felt cold. They covered him with a plastic bag
and positioned him in contact with Watts. Paterno ascended at 11:50 a.m.
Greg Valent ran to the nearest house and called NCRC. Earlandson descended
with water, a sweater and another plastic bag. The victim was covered, with a
carbide lamp for a heat source. At 12:20 p.m. a sleeping bag, first-aid kit and
blanket was sent down. The sleeping bag was placed under him, the blanket over
him and the sweater served as a pillow. Meanwhile the victim's breathing was
short, painful and labored, with pulse fluctuating between 60 and 100. Otherwise
he was stable.
At 1:15 the police arrived and were informed of the victim's condition and need
for a litter. A rope meanwhile was rigged for hauling. The litter arrived at 2 p.m. A
police radio was sent down also, to aid communications.
The lift began with the victim assuming a vertical position as soon as he cleared
the floor. This caused intolerable chest pain and he was lowered again. However,
he steeled himself and when ready, was raised to the lip three feet at a time,
apparently using the available manpower. Paterno ascended a fixed line with the
victim to watch his condition and maneuver the litter.
At the lip a rigid stretcher was eased under Hartman and used to lever him over
the lip. He was immediately given oxygen since it was obvious he was having
trouble breathing. He was carried to an ambulance and thus to a hospital. He had
two fractured ribs but no other injuries.
REFERENCE: Editor "Accident Report" The Windy City Speleonews 22:8 August,
1982 pp 60-62.
ANALYSIS: A grotto committee looked into the accident, offering the following.
The rib injuries apparently were caused by striking a ledge 30 feet down-the only
bruises were to the rib cage. If is felt that the fall was arrested just before the
bottom, either by Paterno's bottom belay or by the rack jamming. All Hartman
remembers is "going fast, trying to jam up the bars, with both hands on the rack"
before losing consciousness. The bottom belay might have been completely
effective if Hartman had communicated the start of his rappel.
The accident, of course, resulted from Hartman's faulty rappel technique. One
should never take the braking hand off the rope unless you have tied off the
rappel-either around your leg or around the rack. Still, the start of a rappel is
sometimes very tricky and it is easy to forget and release the braking hand while
maneuvering
Novices should be supervised but absolute control is impossible. Really, it is the
novice who should make sure he is supervised.

---

Roppel Cave, Kentucky
June 12, 1982

At 11 a.m. on June 12, 1982, Kevin Bruno, Danny Dible, Greg McNamera and
Dave Black entered Roppel Cave, near Mammoth Cave National Park in Kentucky.
At about a.m. (13th), after ten hours of surveying below the Rift, they headed out.
At the ascent of the Rift, a deep canyon that cuts across Yahoo Avenue, Black
was last. This ascent involves a 20 and a 46 foot drop, permanently rigged with a
single piece of PMI. All four made it up the 20, Black finding that the upper
ascender knot of his 3-knot rig was grabbing, causing him to have to force it up.
This cased some fraying but at the top, all three strands of the 5/16th Goldline were
still intact. Before starting up the 46 he retied the frayed ascender knot so that the
worn place would not abraid further.
The first three proceeded up the 46 and to the dry spot about 500 feet further on.
Black went up. As he tried to cross the upper lip, however, the frayed sling broke.
As he grabbed the rope to keep himself upright, the other two knots released, and
he fell "at nearly freefall speed" back down the rope. Black let go of the rope and
wrapped his legs around it, slightly decreasing his speed. The other two knots then
either abraided or melted off the rope and he fell free, landing on the bedrock shelf
between drops in a three inch pool of water.
The force of the fall had been taken mainly by his heels and buttocks. After a
minute or so he moved out of the water onto a mud bank. He could discover no
obviously broken bones but it was very painful to put weight on his heels.
His lamp and eyeglasses had been knocked off so he got out a flashlight and
located the missing items. The lamp had to be reassembled but was finally got
going. After more than half and hour the others returned and lowered a climbing
rig. With this Black made it up the drop. It was so painful for Black to put weight on
his heels that he had to crawl much of the walking passage to the entrance. The two
miles took four hours; they emerged at 11 a.m. Sunday (13th). Black's injuries
proved to be only bruises.
REFERENCES: 1) Dave Black Personal Communication May 12, 1983 2 p.
2) Dave Black Trip Report-Roppel Cave unpublished undated
ANALYSIS: Obviously Black's vertical rig was inadequate. A vertical rig must
continue to support the caver if one of it's components fails. Even if the slippage of
the bottom two knots was due to some action of Black's, such panic reflexes should
have no effect on a proper rig.
The main point here, I feel, is that parties should pay close attention to the last
man in line, especially at a point where a serious accident may occur, like a vertical
drop. The last man has no one still coming to help him if he gets in trouble, as
others in a strung-out party would. In this case, if Black had sustained a serious cut,
he could easily have bled to death before the others got tired of waiting and
returned. A rule in caving should be: Always keep track of the person behind you. If
everyone in a party is doing this, the party is "together." A lack of togetherness is
a common occurrence in caving parties.

---

Laurel Creek Cave, West Virginia
June 12, 1982

At about 2 p.m. on Saturday, June 12, a group of three cavers from Maryland
entered Laurel Creek Cave in Monroe County, W. Virginia. Some time later the
entrance passage, a stream inlet, flooded trapping the three. They had parked their
car directly outside and when that area became flooded, Bob Roles, the owner of
the cave, called the Monroe County Sheriff. On Saturday night the Sheriff called
Bob Liebman who mobilized a force of cavers. It was obvious, however, that
nothing could be done until Sunday morning when the water level would have
dropped.
Though the main entrance to the cave is a stream inlet, the nearby Hilltop
Entrance affords access to the main passage a little downstream. A trip into this
between 10:30 and noon on Sunday showed things well-flooded. Meanwhile the
rain had stopped and the top of the trapped cavers' car appeared. The water level
was falling rapidly so a push for the Theater Room, where they hoped the trapped
cavers to be, was readied. Three cavers with wetsuits would be sent downstream
with lifelines and a boat would be taken in as far as possible in case the victims were
trying to come out.
The cavers' car had emerged and been towed away. From the gear inside it was
deduced that at least one of them must be experienced.
A phone line from the Hilltop Entrance was laid to the the furthest downstream
dry point. As the wetsuit cavers readied for a 6:25 p.m. push, voice contact was
made with at least one victim in the cave. Everyone was related.
On the the first attempt the push crew ran out of rope short of the Theater Room.
When rope was relayed downstream to them, the wetsuiters moved on, through a
foot of air space into the Theater Room where the trapped cavers were indeed
waiting. They were all tired but otherwise not injured or disabled. They had
panicked when they found the water to be up but calmed down when one of the
group fell into neck-deep water.
Now each was fitted with a life-vest, and alternating rescuer-victim, they hauled
themselves back up the fixed lines. All three were out under their own power by
They had been in the cave about 31 hours.
REFERENCES: 1) Patty Daw "Laurel Creek Cave" The Carabiner Wrap-up 8:6
August, 1982 pp 5-6.
2) George Dasher "More Notes on the Subject" ibid. pp 6, 12-14.
ANALYSIS: It is not clear how the weather looked when the group entered the cave.
Dasher states that the water rose fast. Perhaps the rain was from an unexpected
thunder storm. Most entrapments could probably be avoided if the weather
forecasts were religiously heeded, however. Apparently it is lucky they were not in
the lower levels of the cave. The group showed good sense in waiting for the flood
to subside.

---

Jansill Cave, New Mexico
August 7, 1982

Five cavers were in Jansill Cave, Chavez County, New Mexico on August 7, 1982.
As they proceeded down through an area of "crumbly" breakdown, two rocks fell
striking Bill Goodall (32) on his hard hat and foot. Goodall suffered a broken bone in
the top of one foot but had only a sore shoulder and neck muscles to show for the
blow to the head. No evacuation was required.
REFERENCES: 1) Dave Belski "Trip Reports-Jansill Cave" Southwestern Caver
Nov.-Dec., 1982.
2) Carol Belski Personal Communication July 6, 1983.
ANALYSIS: No one saw or heard one rock fall. A warning was yelled for the other
and Goodall moved but was struck anyway. The cavers feel the vibrations from their
travel through the breakdown must have caused the rock fall. An alternate route
has since been found.

---

Roto Rooter Cave, California
August 1982

On August 14, 1982 Arley Kisling and Jim Wolff made a trip into Roto Rooter
Cave, in the Marble Mountains of Siskiyou County, California to check out the
water level in the Sleaze Squeeze, a wet crawl near the furthest point of exploration,
some 500 feet from the entrance pit.
Kisling, having not been in the cave before, thought he would check the crawl
first. Since he didn't have a wetsuit, the two agreed he would be the determiner as
to whether or not they should continue. Kisling sized up the situation and
determined that it wasn't all that wet and proceeded down the crawl. Presently he
came to a point where the down-sloping passage reaches a pool of water, 6-8 inches
deep with 12-16 inches of air space above which allows the caver a chance to stay
out of the water. While bridging across the pool, Kisling's cave pack became
submerged in the pool and a great explosion occurred, knocking him out of his
position above the pool and into the water. His lamp was extinguished.
Wolff was some distance behind, so in the dark Kisling had to grope in his pack
for his second source of light, an electric head lamp. The explosion had broken the
lens to the light, but luckily, not the bulb. However, the battery pack was badly
damaged as well, with a broken latch and hinge. Still in the dark, Kisling found the
four batteries and assembled the pack by wrapping the power cord around it to hold
things together. This was all done before Wolff could get to Kisling with extra light.
Kisling was pretty shaken by the incident and with soaking clothes, imminent
hypothermia in the 37 degree cave and a now-questionable sources of light. They
decided to make their exit.
REFERENCE: Jim Wolff Personal Communication September 28, 1982.
ANALYSIS: As Wolff suggests, 'spent" carbide should not be in a container where
water can get at it. Since it is usually still producing gas, it cannot be put in
something water tight, But should be kept in something that will allow further gas
to slowly escape. As Wolff says, "One should always be aware of the potential
bomb we carry around-how many times have you peeked into your cave pack for
something and used your carbide lamp for the search?"

---

Organ Cave, West Virginia
August 14, 1982

On Saturday August 14, Janet McCormick, Larry Lilly, Wes Thorne and George
Dasher (30) entered Organ Cave, in W. Virginia, through the main, commercial
entrance, and proceeded to the Cyclop's Passage about an hour and a half, and one
drop, into the cave.
They went up the Cyclop's Passage taking a few pictures. After 30 minutes
travel, it appeared the passage dimensions were decreasing. They were after
photos of the largest possible passage so they turned back retracing their steps
through 20-30 foot high and wide trunk.
Dasher was bringing up the rear at one point, moving over the floor of breakdown
and came to a short, six-foot climb-down. The top was a small rock slab that
somehow didn't look stable enough to support him. The nearest alternative, he saw
was twenty feet away-to far over "tedious" breakdown. The others had climbed
down on the opposite side of the passage.
Dasher knelt and tested the block, then lowered a leg over the drop and
retested-it seemed secure. Swinging his body over the drop he found "the rock
stayed in place for about a second, then abruptly came loose."
Dasher went over backwards, the 200 pound slab right behind. Fortunately he
was precipitated out far enough that the rock fell not on him, but between his feet.
Unfortunately he bounced, continuing over another drop, backwards. This was
frightening since he didn't know the depth of this drop. It proved to be only five
feet, Dasher landing on his helmet, feet in the air. Only his tripod was damaged.
REFERENCE: George Dasher Personal Communication August 16, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Breakdown to be used as an anchor for ropes or for the sole hand-hold
in a climb must be forcefully tested at all angles. Part of the blame here must be
placed on the rest of the group, however, since the last man in line will tend to feel
rushed if no other group member stays with him. He will thus tend to take chances.

---

Un-named Water-filled Cave, Florida
August 24, 1982

On August 24, 1982, members of the Florida State University swim team were
practicing in two water-filled sinkholes in Leon County, Florida. A 20 foot
underwater tunnel links the two water holes. Kenneth Alan Eric Spence (19) swam
through this tunnel twice. On a third attempt he drowned.
REFERENCE: AP "A Man Drowns Attempting to Get Through Tunnel" The
Patriot (Harrisburg, PA) Thursday, August 26, 1982.
ANALYSIS: According to the swim team captain the sinkhole "is a place where
veteran swim team members play a trick on newcomers. They disappear into the
small hole in the ground and reappear in another hole.' That is, this foolishness
was being promoted by veteran members of the swim team, who must therefore
take partial responsibility.

---

Sullivan's Cave, Indiana
August 28, 1982

On August 28, 1982, a group of six experienced cavers entered Sullivan's Cave in
Indiana. They "penetrated to nearly the rise of the Sullivan River when one of the
group displayed signs of advanced hypothermia." Three of them went for help
when the victim refused to proceed. The State Police were called and they called
NCRC, who alerted Bloomington and Central Indiana Grotto members. The
Bloomington cavers answered the call accompanied by an EMT, with CIG on
stand-by. The victim was reached and given aid. He eventually left the cave under
his own power.
REFERENCE: Jane Miller "Minutes, September Meeting" CIG Newsletter
October, 1982 98.
ANALYSIS: It may not apply to this situation, but be aware that a victim of
hypothermia, if he is in an environment where he will continue to lose body heat
while moving may be better off to stop. Movement for a hypothermia victim no
longer produces much body heat and may use up the last of the victim's energy,
causing death.

---

Binkley's Cave Indiana
September, 1982

In September of 1982 three cavers were touring Binkley's Cave in Indiana. After
some time they took a breather, all three sitting on a large breakdown slab. When
they got up, the slab, weighing some 4-500 pounds, "slipped about 1 1/2 feet,
trapping the foot of one caver, Cynthia Cain. The other two cavers were just able to
move the rock to free Cain. The foot was bruised and had a tear between two toes
but was not sufficiently injured to prevent her from continuing.
REFERENCE: Tom De Camp Michiana Caver (N. Indiana Grotto) October, 1982 pp
150-152.
ANALYSIS: Breakdown should always be considered potentially unstable.

---

Your Cave, Alabama
September 11, 1982

On September 11 a group of cavers were on the way to My Cave on West Point
Mountain in Alabama, when they encountered a new entrance, since named "Your
Cave." Just inside is a slope with unstable talus. John Van Swearingen IV (38)
began climbing down, attempting to clear the slope of loose rock for the safety of
those to follow. Suddenly a large (500 lb) boulder moved, momentarily pinning his
right hand. The hand was mashed and bloody so the group exited the cave, walked
to the vehicle and proceeded to a hospital where the victim displaced numerous
"victims" of a civil defense drill.
REFERENCES: 1) John Van Swearingen III "A Typical, Normal Cave Trip"
Huntsville Grotto Newsletter 23:10 October, 1982 76.
2] John Van Swearingen III Personal Communication July, 1983.
ANALYSIS: The entrance areas of caves are often very unstable due to weathering.
The victim was certainly correct in trying to clear the slope. Watch out in those
virgin caves.

---

Cueva de la Colindoncia, Puerto Rico
October 3, 1982

On Sunday, October 3, 1982, a group of five cavers entered Cueva de la
Colindoncia in Puerto Rico. An additional person stayed outside while the rest did
the 50 m entrance rappel. They checked leads and explored for awhile, then made
ready to leave. The rope ended in a tangle in space-one of the cavers had earlier
had the person above pull up some gear. Luckily the man outside was still waiting
and let the rope down again without a tangle.
When Mayu Gattas got out her gear, which she had borrowed from a caver not
present, she discovered she didn't know how to put on the 3-Gibbs rig. Her
companions offered advice and help which proved ineffective. The rest then
ascended, set up a hauling system and pulled Gattas up.
REFERENCE: Joe Troester "Cueva de la Colindoncia" Unpublished Report
ANALYSIS: The entrance is a free drop except for a ledge, 15 m down. Rope will
often tangle if thrown all at once. One should not vertical cave without practicing,
especially if you are using someone else's gear.

---

Culverson Creek Cave, West Virginia
October 3, 1982

On Saturday, October 3, 1982, two cavers were exploring in Culverson Creek
Cave in W. Virginia. At a vertical pitch a 25 foot cable ladder had been rigged. One
caver (early 30's) attempted the climb without a belay. Ten feet up she was unable
to hold on and fell, fortunately suffering only minor injuries. They were able to exit
the cave without further incident.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16, 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: The cavers were reportedly very experienced. Still, cable ladders are
SO deceptive-they look easy but, since one is not really attached, when something
happens or one's arms give out, it is only the belay that can save you and cavers
will invariably climb cable ladders without a belay. Given human psychology, I
believe SRT to be the safer way to negotiate vertical drops. In any case, a vertical
technique will not serve you well unless you practice it, perfect it, and don't take
short-cuts when you go to use it.

---

Organ Cave, West Virginia
October 4, 1982

On Sunday, October 4, 1982, eight cavers (late teens) entered the Lipps Entrance
of Organ Cave in West Virginia. They explored into Hell's Fissure for a ways, then
returned upstream, wandering into the Maze. At this point, most of their
flashlights failed. There were no back-up lights so two of the group took the two
still-working lights and continued. This pair proceeded through the Maze, down
Skid Row, up Jones Canyon, through The Breezeway, Left-Hand Passage, Handley
Room, Handley's Silo and to the Sand Floor Room. Then they returned to the
register in the Handley Room to wait for help.
Eventually they were missed, and help was summoned. Sunday night Jerry Kyle
was notified and he and two other volunteers entered the cave and quickly located
the group of six, in the Maze as they expected. The group had only one working
cigarette lighter. One member was diabetic and a bit woozy but was able to
exit without assistance, with the others.
The three rescuers searched a bit for the remaining two, then exited and called
for more manpower. A bit later, four returned to the Lipps area to continue the
search there while four more went in the main commercial entrance to search the
Organ-Lipps connection. The latter group soon found the still missing two, who had
burned the register for warmth. They were out by 10 a.m. Monday morning.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982 pp 9-10.
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16, 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Additional manpower was standing by to expand the search if
necessary. To wander about a cave with inadequate reserves of light until one
becomes stranded is extremely thoughtless. Whether one is new to caves or not, it
should be obvious that back-up lights are necessary.

---

Canadian Hole, West Virginia
October 10, 1982

On Saturday, October 10, 1982, a group of experienced cavers was exploring in
the Canadian Hole portion of the Friar's Hole System in West Virginia. In the Rocky
Horror Streamway, a loose boulder rolled or fell on one caver's leg, badly bruising
it. With the assistance of the party, the injured caver was able to do the "two hours
of crawling and waterfall climbs" necessary to exit the cave.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982 p 10.
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16, 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: According to Dasher, this section of the cave is wet and cold to the
extent that a party must accomplish self-rescue of an injured member or else such
victim will run a high risk of succumbing to hypothermia.

---

Grutas de Tolontongo, Hidalgo, Mexico
October, 1982

Grutas de Tolontongo is a thermal resurgence cave of unknown extent located
about 40 km NE of Ixmiquilpan, Hidalgo, Mexico, north of Mexico City. In October
Allejandro Villagomez (23) a very capable, experienced caver entered the cave
alone to take a brief look. There is heavy water flow, perhaps 10-20 CFS, but due to
the heat, Villagomez did not wear a wetsuit.
About 40 meters in is a waterfall less than a meter in height. Villagomez made his
way up to this falls along the left-hand wall, in a swim but using handholds against
the current. At the falls, where he intended to climb up he was suddenly sucked
into the plunge of the water where the currents were all circulating back into the
falls at the surface. He tried to swim away but could not. To breathe he was forced
to spring from the bottom of the plunge pool to the surface; there he would grab a
breath, be sucked down and repeat the process. On the third spring, he came up in
the falls and got only water to breathe. At that point he was sure he would die.
What could he do? Then, with lungs bursting with the desire to breathe, and held
under by the currents, his thrashing efforts carried him free, and he popped to the
surface. He then made his way out of the pool.
REFERENCE: Alejandro Villagomez Personal Communication January 30, 1093
ANALYSIS: Heavy water flow is always dangerous. Villagomez" narrow escape
from the plunge pool is due to the fact that somewhere in the hydrologic structure of
the flow, some of the water must be going downstream. But making the right choice
in a desperation situation is pure chance. Better to trust to companions, belays,
flotation devices, etc.

---

Park's Ranch Cave, New Mexico
October 31, 1982

On October 31, 1982, Dave and Carol Belski and Dick and Sandy Gilson entered
Park's Ranch Cave in Eddy County, New Mexico. This was to be a quick tour. Five
minutes into the cave Dave Belski (45) stopped to wait for the others. To pass the
time he climbed a small chimney. When the others approached, he slid back down.
At the bottom he missed his footing on the edge of the ledge level with the main
passage and fell an additional three feet or so, striking his right wrist on a rock as
he did so. The wrist was painful so they left the cave. The wrist proved to be
broken.
REFERENCES: 1) Carol Belski "Trip Reports-Park's Ranch Cave" Southwestern
Caver Nov.-Dec., 1982.
2) Carol Belski Personal Communication July 6, 1983.
ANALYSIS: Possibly one is more accident prone when fooling around on an easy
trip than on a trip which you know to be dangerous such that your mind is focused
on the hazards.

---

Snail Shell Cave, Tennessee
November 7, 1982

On November 7, 1982 three cavers (teens) entered Snail Shell Cave near
Murfreesboro, Tennessee, and became stranded. Two other teenagers, who may
have been part of the group, left on the rubber rafts they were using and summoned
help. Rescuers used boats and soon located the missing cavers, who were cold but
otherwise alright.
REFERENCE: From Wire Reports "Searchers Find 3 Chilled Teenagers in Cave"
The Atlanta Journal Monday, November 8, 1982 p 14A.
ANALYSIS: This is possibly attributable to dead flashlights and no reserves of
light.

---

Green Valley Cave, Alabama
November 11, 1982

At about 1:30 p.m. on Thursday, November 11, 1981, Becky Brown (18) and
companions were exploring in Green Valley Cave Etowah County, Alabama. About
300 feet from the entrance Brown was attempting to climb a chimney called "The
Slide" when she fell some 25 to 30 feet to the sandy floor of the stream level of the
cave.
At 2 p.m. the Etowah County Rescue Squad was called and a unit arrived at
around 3 p.m. A caver heard the call on a scanner and collected Jeff Steele and
Bobby Whorton and arrived at the cave at 3:30 p.m. By that time the victim was at a
"keyhole traverse 30 feet above the lower level.' The victim was passed through
this fissure, a room, another fissure and reached the entrance by 6:45 p.m. She was
later found to have sustained "lower back injuries, leg injuries and lacerations to
the face and head.'
REFERENCE: Bobby Whorton "Green Valley Cave" Gadsden Grotto Newsletter
3:1 Jan.-Feb., 1983 8.
ANALYSIS: Whorton reports the cavers to have been ill equipped and
inexperienced. He also found the rescue squad personnel to have too few
helmet-mounted lights or proper boots. Their lack of "experience with rope rescue
techniques underground" slowed the rescue somewhat.

---

Friar' Hole System, West Virginia
November 13, 1982

On November 13, a group of nine cavers entered Friar's Hole in W. Virginia to do
a six mile through trip, coming out the Canadian Hole entrance to this very
extensive cave system. This is somewhat normal caving, including water crawls as
well as borehole, until the exit is reached where one must negotiate a series of
drops, of 12, 24, 8, 15, and 35 feet. At least the first four were waterfalls at this
time. Before the trip started, these had been rigged, a single rope strung over the
first three, the 15 left as an unbelayed free climb (5.4) and another rope on the 35
foot entrance drop. The first three were rigged with the rope laying right in the
waterfall.
Only the leader and one other wore wetsuits; several had no helmet-mounted
electric light, one had only a carbide lamp-no backup. At least some had left their
regular vertical rigs behind, bringing a lighter set up to save weight on the long
trip. One planned to use prussiks but had no previous experience.
The trip as far as the exit drops was not without incident. The leaders moved
rapidly, others tried to keep up and the caver second most experienced in that cave
brought up the rear. At least a couple tried to maintain the pace of the leaders but
weren't used to it and tired. The group became very strung out, causing confusion
at some points to those unfamiliar with the cave.
At the exit waterfalls, cavers put on any extra dry clothes and they stated up. The
leader went up the first two drops and was quickly out of sight. Two cavers then
proceeded up drop 1 with some difficulty. The next caver had never used prussiks
before. Six feet above the plunge pool this caver got into the falls, the carbide lamp
was extinguished. The prussiks then slipped and the victim slid down into the pool.
It was quickly decided to haul this caver up. Fortunately the victim is of small
build so this was possible. The three then proceeded to drop 2 while the others
followed. Four cavers still in good condition proceeded up drop 2 and hauled up the
victim and another caver who had grown too tired to do the waterfalls. The original
victim was by now nearly exhausted.
Drop 3 was negotiated with a 3-man shoulder stand. The victim was now shaking
violently as hypothermia set in. They moved on to drop 4, the free climb were it was
obvious that another rope was needed to get the victim up. The leader went on out
and was back in 45 minutes with a rope and down vest. With the rope as a belay, the
victim was allowed to climb up. At the entrance pit, the victim was hauled up by a
6-person surface team. To save time, everyone else was hauled up as well.
REFERENCES: 1) John lacovino "In Gary's Wonderland" The Explorer
(Explorer's Club of Pittsburgh) January, 1983
2) Bruce Randall "Chasing Rabbits or How to Precipitate a Cave Rescue (Maybe?)"
ibid. p 11.
3) Bruce Randall Personal Communication July 16, 1983.
ANALYSIS: Bruce Randall makes the point that the party would have been stronger
at the drops if the pace were slower and if there had been no confusion through the
group being strung out. He goes on to say that the victim succumbed to a
combination of factors: "1. only been caving 3 or 4 times before, 2. poorly dressed
for ascending a a rope hanging in a waterfall, 3. not familiar with knots on a wet
rope, and 4. unduly tired from having pushed unnecessarily to chase some rabbits
through the cave."
The group was quite unprepared for the waterfalls. Vertical rigs were varied and
those using knots in some cases did not know how they would work in wet
conditions. There were few electric head lamps and the carbide cavers apparently
had been using muddy cave water in their lamps. This causes sediment plugging of
the water drip-in caves with muddy water always carry carbide water. Lack of
wetsuits was another problem. A waterfall series can be counted on to provide very
slow going to a large group with some inexperienced cavers, so wetsuits would have
helped.
But the best solution, that would have eliminated all real problems, would have
been to go in Canadian Hole and rig the drops so that the ropes lay out of the water
flow.
When taking novices or cavers inexperienced in a technique required for that
particular trip, it is always a question as to whether they can make it or not and
don't forget that their welfare depends on your judgement, not on their decision to
go, ignorant as they are of the conditions to be met. If it had been possible,
time-wise, it would have been good to take the party down the exit series and back
out SO they could experience the conditions and be able to improve their equipment.
Instead, they came to the exit with the choice of doing it, or retreating 6 miles!.

---

Vast Caverns, Alabama
November 13, 1982

On November 13, 1982 William Garrett, Linda King (18) and Jeff Machen were
practicing deep pit work to give King more experience. Shortly after noon they
rigged the 227 foot entrance drop of Vast Caverns in Jackson County, Alabama, and
Garrett and King rappelled in. They had only two sets of ascenders so Machen
waited at the top-Garret would ascend and Machen would rappel in with Garret's
ascenders for King to use.
At about 1:25 p.m. Machen rappelled in, unclipped from the rope and moved to
where King was sitting, about 25 feet from the bottom of the rope, "partly
protected by a 50 foot high rock wall." King removed her hard hat for comfort and
the two sat talking.
Without warning a rock fell, brushing Machen's right shoulder and striking
King, who screamed. Machen calmed the victim down somewhat and found that
she appeared to have a broken forearm and an injured, bloody leg, with a minor
abrasion causing some facial bleeding.
Machen yelled for Garrett and he descended with a pack. King was covered with
a space blanket. Garret then went for help while Machen stayed with the victim.
Machen moved the victim under a ledge for more protection and administered
what first-aid he could, making a sling for the arm and wrapping her in the space
blanket.
Garrett returned in two hours and called for his pack so that he could rig the pit
with a pulley for the evacuation. At 4:50 p.m. the rescue commenced. An
ambulance service person rappelled in and he and Machen splinted the injured arm
and leg and got the victim into a Stokes litter, ready for hauling.
The Stokes was rigged with the rescuer directly above it for guidance while
Machen exerted some control from below with a line attached to the litter. As the
litter neared the top a 3-cell flashlight came out of the rescuer's harness but missed
Machen, below. The victim reached Jackson County Hospital at 8:05 p.m. The arm
had a broken bone but the leg only a deep puncture wound.
REFERENCES: 1) William Garrett "Rescue at Vast Caverns" Gadsden Grotto
Newsletter 3:1 Jan.-Feb., 1983 pp 5-6.
2) Jeff Machen "Accident Reports-Vast Caverns" ibid. pp 3-4.
3) Dave Teal "Analysis" ibid. 1.
4) William Garrett Personal Communication June 14, 1983.
ANALYSIS: The call-up complicated and the Sheriff's Office never called caver
rescuers. Thus Garrett and Machen became essential parts of the rescue, providing
most of the know-how.
Teal points out that the pit has obvious instability around the upper part. Since
falling rocks can bound laterally for some distance, 25 feet is not far enough
removed from the drop for safety. Certainly, once the two were down they should
not have remained thus exposed for "conversation." Obviously, removal of one's
hard hat in such a location is foolish.

---

Lisanby Cave, Kentucky
November, 1982

In late November, 1982 three cavers entered Lisanby Cave near Princeton in
Caldwell County, Kentucky. They apparently planned to stay in the cave overnight,
as is done on occasion by locals, and built a fire a short ways inside. One of the
group (age 18) was epileptic and unfortunately suffered a seizure. His companions
"either panicked or simply left him alone while seeking help. While unattended
the victim fell into the fire and suffered serious burns. He was reportedly evacuated
by local rescue authorities.
REFERENCE: Mike Dyas Personal Communication March, 1982.
ANALYSIS: Anyone prone to any occasional physical malfunction should alert his
companions to proper remedial procedures before a trip.

---

Huccacove Cave, Colorado
November 21, 1982

On November 21, 1982, five cavers were in Huccacove Cave in Colorado on a
cleanup trip. At 2 p.m. as they were ascending Angel Falls on the way out, "the
upper overhang (dried mud), about two feet in diameter, broke off at the base."
This shattered on an overhang four feet lower, and buried the climber coming last
from the shoulder to the top of his hardhat, the mud fragments filling in the spaces
around him in the slot he was ascending. He descended to relieve himself of the
loose material and continued out. He suffered only slight bruises on his head from
his hardhat.
REFERENCES: 1) Lee Schrock "Incident Report" Pueblo Underground (S. Colo.
Mtn. Grotto) Jan.-Mar., 1983.
2) Editor "Incident in Huccacove" Speleo-Flyer (USAFA Grotto) 1:1 February,
1983 p.
ANALYSIS: The ascent was being done with cavers on the two overhangs to help
novices and help pass trash bags up. A novice had just stepped onto the upper
overhang when it collapsed. Schrock speculates that very dry conditions may have
weakened the dried mud of the overhang. Many cavers had used it previously with
no problem. He also observes that more than one caver making a climb at the same
time is a poor practice.

---

Un-named Pit, Oregon
November 27, 1982

On Friday, November 25, Larry Ritchey (34) began a projected three day hike
through the winter wilderness on the north slopes of Mount Hood in the Cascade
Mountains of Oregon. He was warmly dressed, with long underwear, wool pants
and shirt, parka, mittens and rubber soled boots, and equipped with food and
shelter. He left an itinerary with friends, planning to be back by Tuesday the 29th.
On Sunday the weather produced snow and as he slowly snow-shoed along, he
suddenly plunged into a snow-covered hole, falling 12-14 feet, landing on his back.
His pack prevented injury but, after lighting one of several candles he had, he
found himself at the bottom of a pit about ten feet in diameter, with overhung walls,
with a stream of water swirling along the floor. It came from a passage which he
explored for 200 feet without finding an exit. Moreover, there was no air movement
so he returned to the pit.
After eating (his stove was smashed so food was eaten without cooking) he got
out a 30 foot rope he had brought and realized a rock tied to one end might catch in
the boulders outside if thrown up through the hole.
For the next three days he threw his makeshift grappel to no avail. The first two
nights he slept standing up, feet in the water. The third night he hung in a loop of
the rope, suspended from a tree root.
On Tuesday evening Ritchie's absence was reported to the Hood River Sheriff's
Office. On Wednesday searchers on snowmobiles traced his hike plan but new snow
had covered his tracks and fate. Helicopters were ineffective due to fog and bad
weather. Ritchie was on his own.
By Thursday he had consumed all of his food and was beginning to slip into
hypothermia, with slurred speech and an unsteadiness to his limbs. But that day he
got lucky. The rock at the end of the rope snagged the limb of a dead tree, and he
hauled himself free. It was raining but he dared not stop. He slogged ten miles to
Highway 35, caught a ride and finally was safe.
REFERENCES: Anon. "Missing Hiker Reappears After 3 Days in Hole" The
Oregonian Saturday, December 4, 1982 p D4.
2) Peter Michelmore "A Stone's Throw from Life" Reader's Digest May, 1983 pp
107-112.
ANALYSIS: Certainly this points up the importance of being prepared for
emergencies, especially when engaged in a solo activity. Some, like Ritchie, survive
ordeals like this; others, in the same circumstances, would not. Attitude is very
important.

---

Harmon's Waterfall Cave, West Virginia
November 28, 1982

At around noon on Saturday, November 28, 1982, a group of five cavers entered
Harmon's Waterfall Cave in W. Virginia. After exploring for some time, they had
difficulty in discovering the route back to the entrance. When their carbide supply
ran low, they sat down to wait for help.
Late Sunday afternoon a cave search was mobilized and six cavers responded,
one of whom was familiar with the cave and had brought a map. Though it was
raining hard the main part of the cave is dry and no flooding was expected. Eight
hundred feet of "semi-crawling, tight" passage leads from the 25 foot entrance
climb-down to a junction. If the lost group was not encountered at that point, the
rescuers would split into three groups of two to sweep the known cave.
At the junction they heard voices and soon encountered the stranded cavers, who
were led out with no further incident.
REFERENCES: 1) George Dasher "West Virginia Caving Accidents" The West
Virginia Caver December, 1982 p 10, 15-16.
2) George Dasher Personal Communications December 10, 16 31, 1982.
ANALYSIS: The cavers were "experienced outdoors people with a minimum of
caving experience," who should have had greater light reserves, but did the right
thing under the circumstances.

---

Bear Plunge Pit, Indiana
August, 1981

A caver rappelled the 76 foot entrance pit on a rope that fell 10 feet short of
reaching the bottom. He was warned by another group in the cave. Another
rappelled in with sufficient rope but no light. He had to be assisted (light) in
attaching his vertical gear for ascent.

---

Carcass Pit, Indiana
September, 1982

While preparing to ascend the 70 foot pit, a caver was nearly struck by a falling
oppossum.

---

Indian Cave, Kentucky
November 14, 1982

A carbide dump bag explosion set a jacket on fire while cavers were using inner
tubes for floatation in low air space. The jacket was extinguished by submerging
the caver.

---

Fisher Ridge, Kentucky
November, 1982

On Thanksgiving weekend a group exited to find only eight inches of air space at
"Splash," apparently just escaping entrapment. It rained considerably the next
two days.

---

Nunnally Mountain Cave, Indiana
April, 1982

A caver suffered a minor facial cut when struck by a small rock while ascending a
rope.

---

Roppel Cave, Kentucky
June 12, 1982

A caver tripped, striking his head and was badly stunned.

---

Roppel Cave, Kentucky
June 12, 1982

A carbide dump bag exploded.
