
---------- Page 1 ----------
is the momentary carelessness in easy places, the
psed attention, or the wandering look that is the
ual parent of disaster.
A.F. Mummery
$1.75
AMERICAN
CAVING ACCIDENTS
A REPORT OF
THE NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
SPELEOLOGICAL
MA
SPELEOBOOKS PRESS

---------- Page 2 ----------
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY LIBRARY
1 CAVE AVENUE
HUNTSVILLE, ALA. 35810
American Caving Accidents
A Report of
The National Speleological Society
SPELEOBOOKS PRESS
ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO

---------- Page 3 ----------
Printed by
Adobe Press
515 Isleta Blvd. S.W.
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87105
United States of America
Copyright © 1977
by the National Speleological Society, Incorporated
All Rights Reserved.
Contents
Introduction
Accident Reports
Previously Unreported 1974 Accidents
1975 Accidents
Summary
Appendix: Graphical Presentation
of the Cave Accident Statistics

---------- Page 4 ----------
In Memoriam
LEWIS HOLTZENDORFF, NSS 14831
FRANCIS E. McKINNEY, NSS 4247
GEORGE TRACY
Three outstanding cavers who died in 1975 doing what they loved.
Introduction
This is the ninth annual report of the Safety and Techniques
Committee of the National Speleological Society on caving accidents in
North America. These reports, which have been arranged in
chronological order, are intended to be used as potential teaching or
training guides and are not attempts to indicate blame or find a
scapegoat.
Regretfully, 1975 was distinguished by an unusually large number of
fatal accidents. Five cave diving accidents are mentioned here, but as in
previous editions of American Caving Accidents, this is believed to be
only a fraction of the actual number of drownings while scuba diving in
caves. There were nine nondiving caving deaths in 1975, including three
novices who drowned while exploring caves under flood conditions.
Novices were not always the victims in other fatal accidents; two men
were crushed to death in separate accidents at the mouths of caves. One
of these men was on his first cave trip, but the other had a reputation as
an outstanding, hard-pushing caver. Of the three fatal accidents
involving vertical caves, one boy was a novice, but another was a skilled
caver with over 15 years of vertical experience. Many people have long
thought that beginning cavers are most likely to be involved in an
accident. This is true if one looks at the overall statistics; however, one
cannot maintain, as some have, that only the novice becomes injured
while caving.
Allan Haarr furnished copies of most of the reports which were
previously printed in grotto newsletters. Don Davison, Jr. offered
constructive comments about the analysis of many of the accidents. As in
previous editions of American Caving Accidents, this report was made
possible only because many NSS members reported the accidents so that
cavers might learn from the mistakes of others.
Richard L. Breisch
Editor, American Caving Accidents
NSS Safety and Techniques Committee

---------- Page 5 ----------
Accident Reports
Previously Unreported 1974
Accidents
Tennessee, cave near Pryor Spring Cave


********** Monday, 19 August 1974
Gerald Moni and Beth Elliot hoped to connect a newly discovered pit
with nearby Pryor Spring Cave. As they approached the sink, Moni
thought he heard something in the sink, but since they could not identify
the sound they passed it off as nothing. Ms. Elliot rappelled in, derigged
and started towards the next drop of 40 to 50 feet. She heard a noise but
passed it off as dripping water. When she rounded the corner, she
spotted a wet, shaking goat. It had fallen down the 34-foot entrance drop
but had landed on a mass of rotting branches and hence had received
only a minor head cut and a slight leg injury. The young goat was caught
and fitted with an improvised harness. Moni ascended the pit and
hoisted out the victim.
Analysis: Kids should not be allowed to go caving without at least one
parent along.
Previous reports in American Caving Accidents have described the
rescue of dogs and their companions, but this is the only case of a kid
(goat) being rescued. This accident is not included in the summary at the
end of this booklet.
Source: Elliot, Beth. (1974) "An Unusual Rescue." Speleonews. October
issue, p.69.
Indiana, Buckner Cave


********** Sunday, 27 October 1974
R. J. Blenz received word Monday morning that a group of
Indianapolis boys were believed to be lost in Buckner Cave. Blenz and
other cavers entered the cave about 8 a.m. David Archer, Steve Ballard,
Steve Beatty, Rick Bell, Pete Whitaker and Gary Moos, all between 18
and 21 years old, were found safe an hour later. The group had been in
the cave about 24 hours. Moos had the flu and was suffering nausea and
severe fatigue, but eventually he made it out under his own power by
11 a.m.
Analysis: When found the group had several dim but serviceable
flashlights and a little food. They had tried to find their way out but had
given up and decided to wait for rescue. Some members of the group had
been to the cave a few weeks before but could not remember the route
through the cave.
Source: Anon. (1974) "Buckner Cave Rescue." Bloomington Indiana
Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 12, No. 1, p.10.
Indiana, Shaft Cave


********** Sunday, 17 November 1974
Frank Refd and two other Indiana cavers aided six people in exiting
Shaft Cave. The people were a few hours late in returning.
Source: Anon. (1974). "Shaft Cave Rescue." Bloomington Indiana Grotto
Newsletter. Vol. 12, No. 1, p.11.
Indiana, Coon Cave
1974(?)
A young boy entered a crack in the lower section of Coon Cave and
became stranded when his light failed. He was rescued by several
Indiana cavers.
Analysis: Inexperience and insufficient light.
Source: Anon. (1974). "Coon Cave Rescue." Bloomington Indiana Grotto
Newsletter. Vol. 12, No. 1, p.10.

---------- Page 6 ----------
1975 Accidents
Georgis, Case Cave


********** Saturday, 4 January 1975
Case Cave is not a difficult cave but it does have its hazards. Four
inexperienced cavers were about 1000 feet from the entrance when at
about 6:30 p.m. first-time caver Gwen Place (23) slipped because of the
mud. She slid about 10 feet before her right ankle caught in a crack,
stopping her fall just inches from a 30-foot drop. The force of her sudden
stop snapped both the bones of her lower leg. Two of her party went for
help, while several cavers from another group stayed with her and her
companion.
The Dade County Civil Defense was contacted at 7:05 p.m. and were
at the cave within 10 minutes. The rescue squad members, who were
skilled in both caving and emergency first aid, entered the cave about
7:30 p.m., but were somewhat delayed in reaching the victim since her
companions who had gone for help were unable to guide the rescuers to
the site of the accident. Because of the type and location of the accident it
was necessary to immobilize the broken leg in an air splint and place the
victim in a Stokes litter. The injury, a compound fracture with nearly 4
inches of bone protruding from the flesh, was extremely painful to the
victim. Ms. Place did not go into severe shock and seemed to suffer very
little once the leg had been splinted. She was admitted to a local hospital
about 15 minutes past midnight.
Analysis: The immediate cause of the accident was slippery mud and
boots. The inexperience of the group prevented them from recognizing
the potentially dangerous area. The cavers who went for help should
have marked the way carefully so they would have no trouble returning
to the victim.
Sources: Report by Foxy Ferguson.
Ferguson, Foxy. (1975) "Compound Fracture, Case Cave." Huntsville
Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 16, No. 3, pp.27-28.
Kentucky, Cool Spring Cave
January 1975
Three inexperienced cavers, David Philips (22), Mark Philips (18), and
Mark Winstead (19), went caving when it was raining. Mark Philips'
flashlight gave out and Winstead dropped his into the water. They then
tried to leave the cave using their only remaining flashlight. About 300
feet from the entrance they found the exit blocked by rising floodwater.
The water rose 18 feet in less than 2 hours, but the three novices were
rescued at 3:45 a.m. by cavers from Cadiz, Kentucky.
Analysis: Inexperience allowed the group to enter the cave during bad
weather and with inadequate light sources. Had the last light failed,
they probably would have drowned in the rising water.
Source: Cravens, Tom. (1975) "Flashlights Give Out as Cave Floods,"
West Virginia, Organ Cave


********** Thursday, 30 January 1975
Four young persons entered Organ Cave without permission and
equipped with flashlights. They had been in the cave once or twice
before and had a slight knowledge of some of the main passages. When
they failed to return promptly their companions on the surface sought
help. A search group, composed mainly of Greenbriar Grotto members,
began sweeping the main passages. They were found about 5 a.m.
Friday morning.
Analysis: The group of young persons had insufficient lights and
experience. Also they did not pay attention to details of the passage.
Source: Swepston, Ed and M. Dyas (1975) "Search and Rescue in Organ
Cave." D.C. Speleograph. March issue, pp. 16-17.
West Virginia, Bowden Cave


********** Sunday, 9 February 1975
Barry Baumgardner, M. Johnson, D. Williams, Alan Carpenter and R.
Garton constructed a 30-foot ladder from two aluminum ladders 20 feet
and 16 feet long. The new ladder was held together with 1/4-inch steel
angle and 3/8-inch steel bolts. In the Cathedral Room of Bowden Cave
the ladder was used to reach a ledge 30 feet above the floor. Several of
the party had climbed the ladder without mishap, and a 3/8-inch
expansion bolt was placed at the ledge to rig cable ladders and ropes.
The ladder was later to be pulled up and erected on the ledge. Carpenter
was climbing the ladder and reinforcing the connections with clamps.
When he passed the center of the ladder which was 15 feet off the floor,
he yelled, "The ladder is bending!" Baumgardner successfully belayed
Carpenter thus preventing a fall and possible injury.

---------- Page 7 ----------
Analysis: Inspection of the ladder showed that the bend occurred not at
the connection but 21/2 feet above it; evidently there was a twisting
strain as well as a tensile strain on the ladder. Ladders and scaling poles
are strongest (but not necessarily stable) when set up vertically. Cavers
should avoid using such devices if they are inclined much from the
vertical. Ladders and scaling poles should always be belayed. After one
person has gotten to the top, the belay should be from above.
Source: Anon. (1975) "Accident Report." Karst Caver, Vol. 9, Nos. 1&2,
p.14.
Indiana, Salamander Cave


********** Saturday, 22 February 1975
More than 2 inches of heavy rains on top of already saturated ground
brought widespread cave flooding to the Bloomington, Indiana area. A
stream in Salamander Cave normally leaves the cave through a narrow,
sinuous canyon just inside the entrance passage. Upstream the passage
averages 6 feet in height. 500 feet from the entrance is Breakdown
Mountain and the start of 30-foot-high stream passage, which makes this
a popular beginners' cave.
Around 1 p.m. three university freshmen, Kim Alan Aldrich (19),
Marcia Ann Bott (18), and Terry Lee Yokem (18), entered the cave
during the heavy rain. Only Aldrich had any previous caving experience
and none were members of any caving organization. Both Aldrich and
Yokem were equipped with hard hats and carbide lamps; Ms. Bott
carried a large flashlight.
The three were met at the entrance by John Abney and his group
which was leaving the cave because of the rising water. They did not
heed a warning given by Abney. Another warning was issued by Kathy
Hoey, a graduate student who had been studying the aquatic life of the
cave. She had entered around 10:15 but was leaving because the water in
the passage was boot-top high and becoming muddy. Ms. Hoey later
warned another group entering the cave. They left soon after they saw
the situation for themselves. The three freshmen, however, continued
into the cave.
In the middle of the afternoon the storm intensified, and there were
repeated downpours. Abney notified the Indiana State Police about the
flooding cave, and they contacted area cavers. Michael Moore and Jim
Keith found only 18 inches of air space in the entrance when they
checked about 8:15 p.m. At 10:10 p.m. Moore, Keith, and Don Paquette
returned to Salamander Cave. Less than 100 feet into the entrance
passage they discovered the bodies of Marcia Bott and Kim Aldrich. A
very brief search failed to locate the body of Yokem. It was assumed that
he had either escaped to the Breakdown Mountain or else his body was
farther upstream in the entrance passage. The searchers left to notify
the authorities before attempting to remove the bodies. Because of the
continued raining and flooding, they were not able to do the recovery
until after 8 a.m. the next morning. Yokem's body was found a short
distance from his companions'
Analysis: "The inexperienced spelunkers were warned of the flooding
twice while entering the cave. It is impossible to know what really


********** happened, but lack of caving knowledge could have led to the following:
As the water began to rise more rapidly they must certainly have
become alarmed and perhaps panicked and attempted to escape.
Alternatively, as others have done, they could have sought safety at the
Breakdown Mountain and then attempted to get out as soon as the first
flood crest had passed. In either case, they nearly reached the entrance.
"Approximately one inch of air remained trapped at the 8-foot-high
ceiling throughout the flooding, and at least one cave cricket survived
there. It would have been impossible, however, for a human to remain at
the ceiling at that point. Some of the high spots upstream in the flood
passage are higher than the place where the three drowned, but it is not
known if these areas trapped air during the flood. It appears that they
made no effort, or were unable, to retreat once they reached the final
turn in the entrance passage.
"The deaths of Kim Aldrich, Marcia Bott, and Terry Yokem may be
attributed to improper preparation for the trip, poor judgement, and
panic. Had they waited in the large passage at the Breakdown Mountain
for only a few more hours, rescue could have been trivial." (Moore)
Sources: Moore, Michael C. (1975) "Accident Report: Three Drown in
Salamander Cave; Four Rescued from Wayne Cave, Monroe County,
Indiana." NSS News. Vol. 33, No. 4, pp.55-57.
Paquette, Don and Mike Moore (1975) "A Tragic Weekend."
Bloomington Indiana Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.4-6.
(numerous newspaper articles)
Indiana, Wayne Cave


********** Saturday, 22 February 1975
While the tragedy in Salamander Cave was unfolding, nearby Wayne
Cave was also being flooded. Wayne Cave is well-known for having a
cave stream which rises during heavy rain. With 4.27 miles of passage,
this is the longest cave in the county.
Four cavers from Illinois, Paul Homan (37), Bob BonDurant (32),
Randall Masterson (26), and Gene Strain (40), entered the cave
Saturday. Around midnight the wife of one man notified the police that
the group was in the cave. Rescuers managed to enter the cave for about
a quarter mile but were unable to contact the four men because of the
chest-deep water. By 12:15 p.m. cavers Tom Rea and Kevin Komisarcik
were able to get to the Mountain Room where they found the missing
group. They reached the surface by 2:30 p.m. Sunday.
Analysis: "The cavers trapped in Wayne Cave followed accepted
procedure and sought a high spot to await lower water and rescue. They
huddled together to provide heat and rationed their meager food supply.
They were cold, wet, and hungry, but had light and otherwise were in
good shape when rescued. Although Masterson and Strain were novices,
the calm thinking and experience of Homan and BonDurant probably
prevented additional disaster on an already tragic weekend." (Moore)

---------- Page 8 ----------
Sources: Moore, Michael C. (1975) "Accident Report: Three Drown in
Salamander Cave; Four Rescued from Wayne Cave, Monroe County,
Indiana." NSS News. Vol. 33, No. 4, pp.55-57.
Paquette, Don and Mike Moore. (1975) "A Tragic Weekend."
Bloomington Indiana Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 12, No. 2, pp4-6.
(numerous newspaper articles)
Georgia, Climax Cave


********** Sunday, 9 March 1975
While waiting for others to proceed, one caver attempted a large
chimney. When he got near the top he requested information on how to
proceed. Since Larry Crapps had climbed the chimney several times
before, he climbed up the wall to show the other caver the best way to
traverse the side. About 30 feet up, some loose rocks began pouring into
Crapps' face and he started a very fast descent of the chimney. He
shouted a warning, "Look out!" On the way down he hit 4 or 5
projections with his head, chest and arms, which caused him to be
thrown into a sideways fall. He landed with all his weight on one leg.
Although he did not require assistance in getting out of the cave, he later
needed crutches and a cast for his leg.
Analysis: This injury could probably have been prevented had a belay
been used. After the accident the injured caver's pride caused him to
refuse a belay or help from another group of cavers. This was very
foolish. An injured person should not be permitted to reject available
aid.
Source: Crapps, Larry. (1975?) "Accident in Climax." grotto newslet-
ter (?)
British Columbia, Canada, Bluewater Cave


********** Monday, 24 March 1975
"On the afternoon of March 24, 1975 five loggers, Roger Samuels, Rick
Gayton, Wilhelm Evers, Dick Buchanan, and Rob Adams descended the
30-foot Lightening [sic] Pit in Bluewater Cave. None of the men were
experienced cavers. They rigged the pit with 3/4-inch manilla and
hand-over-handed down the then raging waterfall. The first man down
realized he was in trouble, but they had no prearranged signals, and the
roar of the waterfall was too great for them to yell signals. They
continued to descend until all were at the bottom unable to ascend.
Repeated attempts to ascend only served to tire them. After several
hours Adams managed to get to a ledge half way up where he could rest
before attempting the top. Adams left the cave at about 4:00 p.m. He
returned to the logging camp and managed to get the assistance of about
twenty loggers who returned and hauled the men from the cave. All
were back at camp by 8:30 p.m." (Shaw)
Analysis: Inexperience in caving techniques caused the men to
underestimate the difficulty in doing hand-over-hand climbs, especially
under a waterfall. If they had not been able to get out of the cave on the
day of their entrapment, the loggers could easily have died of
hypothermia during the night.
Sources: Report by Pat Shaw.
Shaw, Pat. (1976) "Bluewater Cave, Vancouver Island." The Canadian
Caver. Vol. 8, No. 1, 31-33.
Puerto Rico, Rio Camuy Cave


********** Wednesday, 26 March 1975
A party of six cavers descended a pit near the Ventosa Entrance of the
Rio Camuy Cave System on the morning of 26 March 1975. They spent
their time working on dye tracing and surveying projects. Francis E.
McKinney (35) was the last person to ascend the 50-meter pit. About 5
minutes later, near 6:30 p.m., a whizzing noise was heard, followed by a
loud crash and then a scream from the bottom of the pit. Steve Williams
called to McKinney who answered in a loud voice. Brian Smith
immediately left to alert Frosty Miller and Terry Tarkington, who had
gone out of the cave already.
It was determined that the main rope had not broken and it was safe to
use it for rappelling. Williams descended and found a Jumar ascender
attached to the main rope about 23 meters from the floor. The Jumar had
a piece of broken polypropylene rope attached to it. Williams found
McKinney lying on his right side, resting his head on his right arm and
speaking in a loud voice. He was able to describe his own injuries which
included a definite break in his left leg and probably in the pelvic region.
He also thought he had a possible lower spine injury and possibly a break
in either his right arm or wrist since his right hand was going numb.
Help was sought from other cavers in the area as well as medical
personnel from Arecibo. For the next 21/2 hours McKinney had
intermittent pain in the area of his abdomen but none in the chest or
stomach. Shortly after 9:00 p.m. he began to have labored short breaths
and chest pains. About 5 minutes later his breathing stopped and
Williams started mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and heart massage.
Frank Shire rappelled down to assist. After about 30 minutes no
favorable response was obtained. The body and all gear were removed
from the cave by 5 a.m.
Analysis: Francis was the last to climb the pit, so no one saw the
accident. However, it is possible to partially reconstruct it:
1. Francis was an experienced vertical caver and had done many pits
more difficult than Ventosa. For example, he was the second person
down Surprise Pit in Fern Cave.
2. The rope was wet and muddy, both from a constant drip over the
lip and from the boots and gear of the five cavers who ascended before
him.

---------- Page 9 ----------
3. Francis was using a new (to him) vertical rig of two Jumars with a
chest box. He had climbed a clean dry rope for fifty feet in practice three
times near Oak Ridge and had done a dirty sixty-foot pit the preceding
day. On both occasions he had complained that the lower Jumar was
sticking so badly that he had to use both hands to move it.
4. The upper Jumar was found about seventy-five feet above the
bottom of the pit. The polypropylene ski rope connecting the Jumar to
the foot loop had abraded and failed at the point where it passed through
the chest box.
5. Francis, himself, did not know what had happened.
6. Francis disconnected his own box from the rope to help Steve
descend.
7. Steve does not remember taking Francis' lower Jumar off.
8. The rope, Bluewater III, was essentially new. There are worn
streaks on the rope in the area where Francis fell and occasional heavily
worn spots. Had these been caused by hauling gear out they would have
been on other parts of the rope, both above and below the section of the
fall (considerable rope was on the floor of the pit during the ascents and
descents).
9. The teeth of Francis' Jumars contained a lot of mud.
The accident was apparently initiated by the failure of the upper
Jumar sling. Polypropylene ski rope has very poor abrasion resistance
and broke after rubbing in the chest box. Francis must either have been
"thumbing" the lower Jumar or had taken it off to work on it when the
upper sling failed. He had a chest loop and extra Jumar in his pack. This
safety would have caught him. (This was reconfirmed by actual tests a
few days after the accident.) Our reconstruction is that the upper Jumar
sling failed while the lower Jumar was being thumbed. We cannot
postulate a mechanism which would explain the rope damage found but
the damage would seem to rule out the possibility that the lower Jumar
was off the rope.
During the rescue itself, those at the top hoped that his injuries were
not too serious as he was quite lucid. Steve did not tell us that he found a
Jumar 75 feet up as he was trying to keep Francis in an optimistic frame
of mind. This he was able to do. His injuries were such that there was no
way to save his life. The fall caused a fracture of the sacrum which led to
a rupture of the aorta 3.8cm (1.5 inches) long at the time of the autopsy.
It must have originally been a puncture wound almost sealed by the
bone fragment which caused it and then been enlarged during the
removal of the body from the cave since the amount of blood passing
through the aorta and the pressure which it is under imply that Francis
would have died within five minutes had the original rupture been that
large.
What can be learned? Among other things: (1) Loose woven
polypropylene ski rope is poor sling material. (2) The ability of Jumars to
catch and hold, not merely grip and hold, needs to be evaluated. (3) We
need to design a "bendable" stokes litter.
Sources: Miller, L., F. W. Shires, T. W. Tarkington, R. L. Wallace,
and S. R. Williams. (1975) "Accident Report: Fatality in Rio Camuy
System." NSS News. Vol. 33, No. 8, pp.132-133.
Several newspaper articles.
Chiapas, Mexico, Sumidero Yochib
April 1975
A group of very experienced cavers from Canada and the United
States spent several days attempting to bottom a large cave known as
Sumidero Yochib. The cave contains a large river and has waterfalls in
some of the pits.
Mike Boon reports on an incident which occurred near the end of the
expedition: "Next day I was standing on the shingle at the bottom of the
oxbow when there was a sudden impact and Pete [Thompson] landed
after a fall later measured at 16 feet. After we had stopped laughing we
found that he had sprained his ankle. After a little discussion he decided
he wanted to go back to camp before his ankle swelled up, so after I had
had a quick look at the last pool, which led almost at once to waterfall
number thirteen, we made a three-legged retreat. Pete's ankle was
quite sore by the time he got back, though he managed quite well when
we replaced ladders with prusik ropes."
Analysis: "General public opnion holds that inexperienced cavers are
more accident prone than experienced cavers. Yet Mike Boon and Pete
Thompson, both seasoned cavers with over 15 years of experience in
caving, were involved in a minor yet potentially disastrous mishap. This
accident was due to:
1. Over enthusiasm to bottom the cave, as Pete himself admits,
caused him to drop his guard and he therefore failed to evaluate the
situation properly.
2. The use of wetsuit mitts while attempting a difficult traverse
hindered Pete's ability to obtain a sufficient feel for the rock.
3. Mike Boon's neglection, as lead man, to inform Pete as to the
difficulty involved in doing the traverse.
Though time is a major factor in caving, it should not overshadow
one's judgement. "Bottoming the cave" should not maintain precedence
over safety in caving. As in Pete's case, over enthusiasm to push a cave
could have been disastrous. It can also create many other problems such
as: people wandering away from the main party without informing them;
neglecting to check and maintain gear; not checking hand holds, etc.
Cavers should be fully aware of the situation at hand, the techniques
to be used, and the use of their equipment as well as its limitations.
Wearing wetsuit mitts, for example, while climbing in caves is
hazardous but easily remedied situation if the wearer realizes their
disadvantages." (Bray and Sandau)
Source: Boon, Mike. (1975) "Return to Yochib-Part 2," Canadian
Caver. Vol. 7, No. 1, pp.6-16.

---------- Page 10 ----------
Wyoming, Horsethief Cave
April 1975
Three novices entered Horsethief Cave, but one turned back a short
time later because his dog could not handle the cave. When the others
did not return within the allotted time, the fellow on the outside went for
help. He got his car stuck in a snowdrift but eventually walked to Lovell.
Park officials organized a rescue. The other two people were found near
the entrance after having finally found the correct way out.
Analysis: The novices learned of the cave through the local grotto, but
they did not attend grotto trips nor practice sessions. This grotto now
recommends: Never take anyone to a dangerous, complicated, or
delicate cave unless you can be reasonably sure they won't go back later
and get into or cause trouble.
Source: Report by Mary Alice Chester.
Florida, Jenny Springs
April 1975
Three untrained cave divers lost their lives in a multiple drowning at
Jenny Springs when they penetrated 300 feet into the cave without a
safety line.
Analysis: At least 18 cave divers have died in this cave, many in multiple
drownings. A triple drowning was reported in the 1967 American Caving
Accidents. Cave diving without proper training and especially without a
safety line is suicidal.
Source: Burgess, Robert F. (1976) The Cave Divers. New York: Dodd,
Mead and Company, 239 p. (see p.212).
New York, Knox Cave


********** Saturday, 3 May 1975
Raymond and Suzanne Ryan, Glenn Bumpus (21), Jayne Schiff (19),
Michael Froehlich, and Anita Sonin began descending the sinkhole
entrance of Knox Cave shortly after 8:00 p.m. All but the Ryans were
students of the State University of New York at Albany and were
novices on their first caving trip. Ice at the bottom of the sinkhole
obscured 3/4 of the entrance gate. They noted no other ice near the
entrance and could not find enough meltwater to fill their carbide lamps.
To gain entry into the cave the party began crawling over the top of the
gate and down the icy ladder rungs. Four of the party entered and only
Schiff and Bumpus still remained outside.
Suddenly and without warning they heard a rushing of air and were
pelted with small particles of ice and snow. The cavers called to the two
outside but heard only a moan in response. They found that Bumpus and
Schiff had been pinned beneath an ice block 8 feet in diameter and 31/2 to
4 feet thick, weighing approximately 1 ton. They realized that Bumpus
had been killed instantly. Jayne Schiff was beneath the ice with only her
legs visible.
The cavers contacted the sheriff's office and the Berne Ambulance.
The sheriff's deputies arrived by 8:30 p.m. Volunteers from the Knox
Fire Department broke up the block of ice and removed Schiff. She
sustained fractured ribs, a fractured left forearm, a punctured left lung
and fractured 5th, 6th, and 7th vertebrae. Her condition was very
critical for over a week after the accident but it finally stabilized. She
may be partially paralyzed permanently.
Analysis: "No warning signs were available to the group that might have
made the accident avoidable and no amount of safety equipment above
the adequate supplies at hand would have made any difference.
The source of the ice block remained a problem to the investigators.
No clues were available at the time to suggest exactly where it came
from. Photos taken during the investigation of the area on the morning
after the accident documented the drag marks on the wall about 25 feet
above the entrance. It now appears that the block came from an area
near the very rim of the sinkhole, close to ground level. It is not known
why such a large block of ice formed near the surface and why it did not
melt as did the ice deeper in the sink. It may have been covered by a thin
layer of mud at the time, making it nearly impossible to see." (Gregg)
Sources: Report by William J. Gregg.
Gregg, William J. "Accident Report, Fatality at Knox." The
Northeastern Caver. Vol. 6, No. 3, pp.57-59 (summarized in NSS
News, Vol. 33, No. 8, p. 129)
DeMare, Carol. (1975) "Falling Block of Ice Kills Spelunker Outside
Knox Cave; Companion Hurt." Albany Times-Union, 4 May 1975.
West Virginia, Dig Spring


********** Sunday, 11 May 1975
Bill Koerschner and Joe Saunders spent three trips attempting to dig
open an entrance at Dig Springs which was blowing air. Saunders
describes what took place:
"On May 11th, our fourth visit to the spring, we came armed with a
winch and cables to pull a large rock from the entrance. Our working
area was an alcove about ten feet long, eight feet wide, and six to eight
feet high. Two rather large blocks lay on the ground, damming the
spring. These we wished to winch out as a sledge hammer had proven
worthless the week before.
"In order to minimize the effect of mud suction, we started digging
around the rock's base, which would also give us a better hold with the
chains. While we were doing this, Bill got carried away and started to
dig away from the target rock, at the base of the blocks forming the right
wall. A few minutes after he started digging there, he said, "I hope this
thing doesn't fall on me." A minute or two later I heard, and then saw
from the corner of my eye, some crumbs of dirt roll down from the side of

---------- Page 11 ----------
the block. I looked up, expecting to see someone standing above us on
the small cliff. What I saw instead was the right wall of the alcove
toppling toward me. In a split second I jumped for my life toward the
outside of the alcove, yelling as I did, It's falling, get out!' Bill, who was
crouched at the very base of the wall when I yelled, had time to stand up
and make a brief move to his left before he was hit. The wall was
composed of two 3- to 4-ton blocks with a half ton of smaller stuff on top.
With a ripping noise the whole stack toppled. The bottom block was
stopped by the target rock, but upper block slid off the lower one,
hitting Bill on the right side of his body, knocking him down.
"I got up, dismissing my minor scrapes, and looked over to Bill. His
shirt was in shreds, his shoulder was bent in a grotesque angle, and a
deep gouge in his lower right arm showed the tendon or bone. He said
something about going to black out, so left for aid. I got a local [person]
to call for an ambulance from Princeton, 15 miles away. While the local
waited for the ambulance at my car, I returned to Bill with some clean
clothes to cover the wounds with. I covered him with the clothes to keep
him warm and minimize shock, and I kept talking to him to keep him with
us. About forty minutes after the accident, the ambulance crew arrived.
After securing the lower block with a cable, we dug his foot out from the
rubble and put him in a stretcher. It took another 30 minutes to carry
him back to the road, and about two hours after the accident he was in
the hospital. He underwent four or five hours of surgery. His injuries
were a broken jaw, broken shoulder, broker lower right arm, and
various nerves, muscles, and blood vessels ripped loose from the upper
arm. The orthopedic surgeon who worked on Bill described the injuries
to the arm as as bad as he's seen for survivors of mining accidents. There
is considerable question now as to whether any use of the right arm can
be recovered, even with future surgery attempts to put the nerves back
in place."
Analysis: Even considering the serious injuries sustained by Bill, both
he and I were lucky. If I had not heard the crumbs of dirt rolling, neither
or us would had any warning. I would have been struck frontally and Bill
would have been pinned or crushed by the lower block. Bill was lucky
that the rock hit him while he was standing and that it didn't hit him
more on his head. We were also lucky that I could go for help.
"What can we learn from this? Certainly not that digging should be
stopped, for part of the essence of caving is digging to new passage. It is
rather that entrances feature the more unstable walls and ceilings and
cavers should respect potentially unstable rocks. Bill and I got too
careless, ceased thinking about collapses. We thought about part of the
alcove collapsing after we removed the target rock, but we didn't think it
would happen as soon as it did. Perhaps having only two people digging
was unwise. We needed a third or fourth person." (Saunders)
Sources: Saunders, Joe. (1975) "Report on the Accident at Dig Spring."
The Tech Troglodyte. Spring issue, p.5.
Saunders, Joe. (1976) "Near Fatality at Entrance Excavation in West
Virginia." NSS News, Vol. 34, No. 1, .10.
Texas, Dead Deer Cave


********** Saturday, 31 May 1975
Around 5 p.m., on an impulse the owners of Dead Deer Cave decided
to check their cave which lies approximately one half mile from their
home. They found a motorcycle near the highway and helmets near the
entrance. The owners were not worried since many people trespass on
their property to visit the cave. Later in the evening they made two
more trips to check on the trespassers. At 10 p.m. they contacted the
Bexar County Sheriff's Department. At midnight the sheriff's office
contacted the San Antonio Civil Defense which in turn contacted caver
Chuck Stuehm. By 1:45 a.m. six cavers and four men from the sheriff's
department were at the cave.
Greg Passmore and John Graves entered around 2:15 a.m. Graves
rigged a rope and took the lead. Passmore found two wallets and an NSS
application form at the top of the pit. Graves started climbing down a
series of chimneys when he heard someone calling from below. Graves
called out, "How many are there?"
"Two, hurry we're in the pit," came a reply.
"Are you hurt?"
"My legs are broken
and the other guy's dead."
Both cavers wondered if this were really true or a hoax. Graves
scrambled down the rest of the drop and saw a boy hanging in a tangled
mass of ropes. Passmore joined Graves and they both saw the other boy
lying on the floor of the pit half submerged in water. He was lying on his
side and was not wearing a shirt.
Graves rappelled down next to the boy hanging in the ropes and spun
him around. Rigormortis had already set in and his face and lips were
blue. He was David Scott Brown (16). Graves continued down to Paul H.
Hagerty (16) who was shivering violently. Graves attempted to warm up
the injured boy by giving him a Levi jacket and an extra carbide lamp.
The victim was checked for injuries. He escaped the fall with only a
broken leg and a broken jaw. Since it was impossible for Graves to move
Hagerty by himself, he excavated a channel to drain some of the water
from the pool where the boy was lying.
Passmore left the cave to get assistance, taking the two wallets for
identification. Stuehm took charge of the surface aspects of the rescue.
The Texas Cave Rescue group and Terry Jones, an experienced
mountain climber and paramedic, were contacted for assistance.
Explorer Post 700 set up two communications trucks with mobile phones
installed in them. These phones were used to contact many cavers
throughout Texas. Around 5 a.m. Jones reached the victim with
blankets and then requested that an orthopedic surgeon be available on
the surface. The Explorer Post ran communication lines from the bottom
of the pit to the surface and then to the communication trucks. Ronnie
Fiesler in Austin was contacted at 5:15. He gathered ten highly
experienced Austin cavers who arrived at 8:30 a.m.
At 6:30 a.m. the medical equipment arrived at the cave. The
paramedic administered IV injections. They placed a traction splint on
the victim's leg and then placed him in a litter. After the doctor arrived,
morphine was given to the victim. With considerable effort, Hagerty

---------- Page 12 ----------
was removed by 12:30 p.m. Sunday and the dead boy by 3:00 p.m.
Analysis: The two boys were inexperienced and had only a vague idea of
what is involved in ropework. Only the expert action of many of the
rescuers saved Paul Hagerty. At least 34 members of 6 Texas grottos
helped in the effort.
Sources: Passmore, Greg. (1975) "The Accident: First Report." The
Texas Caver. Vol. 20, No. 7, 107-109.
Fiesler, Ronnie. (1975) "Second Report." The Texas Caver. Vol. 20,
No. 7, pp.110-111.
Washington, Ape Cave


********** Sunday, 22 June 1975
A church group, led by Ed Belz (45), explored Ape Cave, a well-known
lava tube. The group was ill-equipped and poorly dressed for this cold
cave. Their light sources were inadequate and no one had a helmet.
At about 8 p.m. the group was in the upper portion of the lava tube,
just above the large lava falls, when Kathy Taylor (17) fell and hit her
head. At first it appeared that a concussion was the most likely injury.
There was no bleeding, but the victim was vomiting and complained of a
severe headache and dizziness. She was delirious and said she was tired.
Belz and the other members of the group tried to carry Taylor out but
could not get her down the lava falls which is almost 10 feet high.
Leaving three people with Taylor, Belz proceeded out by himself to get
help. He encountered Bill Capron (25) and Barry Leibowitz (25), both
NSS members. The two men returned to the injured girl while Belz
proceeded to a nearby town and contacted a search and rescue team.
At the accident site, Leibowitz and Capron found the three uninjured
young people huddled together with a flashlight. Knowing that a long
wait was coming and that hypothermia was a potential problem, the
three were sent out after being given some high-energy food and a
flashlight with fresh batteries. Coats were taken from the two boys since
they would be warm enough on the way out.
The victim was lying on the floor, propped up against the wall. She
was cold and felt nauseous. Because of her head injury, she was not
given any food. She vomited several times. A pack, the coats, and a knit
hat were used in an attempt to keep the victim insulated and warm, yet
she began to shiver about an hour later. A short while later about ten
members of the rescue team arrived. Ms. Taylor was wrapped in
blankets and placed in a Stokes litter. The rescue group depended on
Coleman lanterns which proved to be inconvenient. Only one member
had a hard hat. The victim was carried out and placed in a waiting
ambulance about midnight.
Analysis: It was uncertain whether Kathy Taylor fell because she
tripped or blacked out. She has passed out at least once before for an
unknown reason. It was later found that she had an abnormal number of
blood vessels to the brain and possibly a cerebral hematoma. It may have
been hazardous for her to be caving at all because of this previously
undiagnosed condition. A hard hat would have at least reduced her head
injuries, though the major problem was not related to the fall. It was not
possible for the group to have realized the possible danger, but better
equipment would have alleviated the seriousness.
Source: Report by Bill Capron.
Texas, possibly Dead Deer Cave [?]


********** Thursday, 26 June 1975
Shortly after 3 p.m. Michael Lowrie (17) and David Lanford (16)
descended a cave near San Antonio to a depth of 130 feet. They had
descended without the use of either ropes or lights. Lowrie jumped the
last 12 feet. Lowrie was not able to climb back up the slippery rock;
however, Lanford was able to get out and alert the Shavano Park Police
who called the Civil Defense rescue team. The boy was hauled out by
Rev. Bill Morell and Dick White at about 10 p.m.
Analysis: The two boys had neither rope, lights, nor good sense.
Source: Goode, Jay. (1975) "Teen in Cave Rescued." San Antonio
newspaper.
West Virginia, Barnes Pit


********** Tuesday, 1 July 1975
Several groups of cavers from Ontario, Canada spent a 4-day weekend
caving in West Virginia. One group of six cavers planned a short trip on
the last day before returning home. They decided to use the 15- to
20-foot entrance drop of Barnes Pit to practice ladder climbing. At
approximately 1:15 p.m. George Tracy (28), Marg Saul and Stephanie
Merrin prepared to rig the pit. As the women unrolled the 30-foot
ladder, Tracy walked to the entrance to look for the best spot to place
the ladder.
Suddenly there was a rumble, and Stephanie Merrin saw Tracy falling
backwards with arms outstretched as though the ground had been
jerked from under his feet. The duration of the rock fall was about 3 to 5
seconds, and it was apparent that large rocks to the right of the entrance
had shifted. Tracy was pinned against the solid wall to the left of the
entrance hole by a boulder at least 5 feet in circumference, which had
caught him mid-chest and abdomen. An upright rock about 7 feet in
height appeared to have settled against the right side of the first boulder
and seemed to be partly supported by it. The victim's face was white and
he was breathing in sharp gasps.
Help was sought immediately from the Marlinton Fire Dept., an
ambulance and the Pittsburgh Grotto Rescue List. A jack was placed
between the boulder pinning Tracy and the wall beside the entrance
hole. Small rocks were wedged in the 5-inch gap created by opening the
jaws of the jack to their maximum, but this did not noticeably relieve the

---------- Page 13 ----------
victim who was experiencing increased difficulty in breathing.
One ambulance attendant prepared to administer oxygen but found
that the cylinder was empty. A second cylinder was obtained from the
ambulance but it leaked due to a missing gasket. Tracy began
convulsing. The ambulance attendants did not have any morphine and
were not allowed to administer any drugs. Tracy's condition rapidly
deteriorated and about 90 minutes after the accident he stopped
breathing. Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation was tried unsuccessfully.
After several phone calls a doctor and a nurse arrived 2 hours after the
accident. The doctor was secured by a safety line and from a distance of
20 feet from the victim pronounced him dead. Finally the body was
recovered 6 hours after the accident by using a bulldozer and a GI truck.
Analysis: The written report of the accident gives no indication as to
what caused the rock to fall. It seems meaningless to speculate as to
whether the cavers should have been able to recognize the unstable
condition of the rocks.
The ambulance attendants did not inspire confidence in their
knowledge of first aid and it was inexcusable to have only empty or
faulty oxygen cylinders in the ambulance. The doctor was very slow in
responding to the phone calls but he claimed he did not realize the
urgency of the situation. The cavers present realized too late that they
had little knowledge of first aid or rescue procedures. Much later it was
learned that there was a mine rescue group in the area which could have
provided the specialized equipment and knowledge for such an
emergency. However, this accident was so severe and the rescue so
difficult, that the victim would not have survived no matter how efficient
the rescue effort might have been.
Source: Merrin, Stephanie. (1975) "Accident Report." The Canadian
Caver. Vol. 7, No. 2, pp.3-7.
Report by Allan P. Haarr.
West Virginia, John Brown's Cave


********** Sunday, 13 July 1975
Ten cavers using flashlights for illumination were leaving John
Brown's Cave when Dave Thornton, whose flashlight had gone out, fell
trying to cross a pit near the entrance. He was wearing a helmet
fastened with a string, and he struck his head several times during the
fall. Thornton suffered a fractured lateral projection of the spine. Other
members of his group were able to get him out, but he was expected to
be off work for 6 to 8 weeks.
Analysis: It is hard to see hazards in poor (or no) light.
Source: True, Fred. (1976) The Brass Light. No. 3, pp.28-29.
West Virginia, Norman's Cave


********** Saturday, 19 July 1975
Bob Boward (28) and Robert Gulden made a sightseeing trip through
Norman's Cave. Around 7 p.m. on the way up out of the wet stream
passage going into the Entrance Room, Boward slipped as he climbed
over a large breakdown block. Boward dislocated his shoulder. His arm
was immobilized by tying it to his side with webbing. Because of the pain
it took 1 1/2 hours to go the 200 feet to the entrance.
Analysis: The breakdown was very slick. The group was correct in
immobilizing the dislocated shoulder before trying to move the victim.
Source: Report by Robert Gulden.
California, Big Stream Cave
July 1975
Bill Devereaux was stunned and lightless after being stuck by a rock
which fell down an icy waterfall. He was then inadvertently left behind
by companions and suffered serious hypothermia. It appeared doubtful
whether he could have climbed out unaided with his 3-Gibbs ascending
rig.
Analysis: This information is too sketchy for proper analysis.
Supposedly it was reported in more detail in the Underground Express
of the Willamette Valley Grotto.
Source: Dyas, Mike. (1976) "Local Publications Review." NSS News.
Vol. 34, No. 2, p.32.
South Dakota, Jewel Cave
First week of August, 1975
While on a cross-country trip, four members of the Mother Lode
Grotto and five members of the California Cadet Corps Rifle Team,
stopped at Jewel Cave National Monument for 2 days of spelunking
tours. Even though this was only Gary Johnson's third cave, he did all
right during the first day of caving. But because Johnson was 6 foot 4
inches tall and weighed 240 pounds, his party was concerned about the
tight crawlways they planned to explore the second day.
On the second trip Johnson was able to get through Hurricane Corner
without difficulty. At the Brain Drain he tried to crawl through on his
back. After trying for about a half hour, he started getting cold, so he
gave up on getting through and started backing out. He moved back
about a foot and a half and then announced he was stuck.
Jack Espinal described the problem: "At this point, Johnson's best
friend, Ray Miller, lost control of himself. He started crying and yelling
that they should never have come on this trip and that Johnson was
going to die in the cave. I think that Johnson started to panic when he
heard this. Don Currier started talking to Johnson to calm him down

---------- Page 14 ----------
while I pushed Miller on down the Passage to get him away from
Johnson. I told him to get hold of himself and then come back and help
us.
"In the meantime we had Johnson try several things to free himself.
We had him try and move sideways but he was unable to. We tried to
calm him down by talking to him (this might relax his muscles and he
would be able to free himself) but this didn't seem to help. We pulled on
his legs but this only caused pain in Johnson's rib cage. Finally Johnson's
coveralls were cut in order to remove them and give him some room;
however, this also failed to help.
"At this point we dispatched a party for help. We were located about
forty-five minutes travel time from the elevator entrance to the cave. It
took about two hours for help to arrive. During this time every possible
thing was done to make Johnson comfortable and to keep him warm. The
blanket from the Cave Rescue Bag was placed under Johnson's body as
much as possible. The rest of it was draped over him. Several members
of the party donated sweatshirts and coats to the cause.
"By this time I noticed that Johnson had started to develop the
symptoms of hypothermia. He began shivering and would go into short
periods of incoherence. Two carbide lamps were placed close to
Johnson's head and upper body in an attempt to increase his heat supply.
Johnson said that the light and heat that they produced helped him. We
also gave him a couple of candy bars to increase his energy reserve.
"When the rescue party returned with hammers and chisels a knob of
calcite crystals (nailhead spar) was chipped away. About seven cubic
inches of rock were removed. Johnson then slid his body to the right and
freed himself. He then spent about a half an hour resting and drinking
hot tomato soup brought in by the rescue party. By this time Johnson
was in very good spirits and he moved out of the cave under his own
power."
Analysis: Care should be taken when encouraging new cavers into tight
squeezes. Should difficulty arise in any emergency situation, any person
who panies should be removed quickly from the vicinity of the victim.
First aid for hypothermia should begin early in a rescue. Carbide
lamps, hot food, and extra clothing can be used to prevent chilling of the
victim.
Source: Espinal, Jack. (1975) "Rescue at Jewel Cave National
Monument." The Valley Caver. Vol. 14, No. 5, pp.2-5.
Maryland, Twigg Cave
August 1975
Robert Mongold (30 or 31) and his wife, Anita (25 or 26), wanted to
obtain clay for modelling. They sneaked into Twigg Cave one night about
midnight (the owner of the cave does not grant permission to explore it).
Mrs. Mongold originally planned to stay outside but her husband wanted
her to see a rock formation in the cave. They climbed down the entrance
fissure on a homemade rope ladder. Only a few hundred feet inside their
flashlight stopped working.
Several days later Anita Mongold floundered down a steep, 30-foot
incline. Her husband was able to grope his way to her but they could not
climb back to the main passage. They spent their time huddling for
warmth, drinking cave water, and discussing their favorite foods.
The couple was not soon missed since they were in the habit of going
off on extended caving and camping trips without informing anyone of
their plans. Eventually Anita Mongold's parents began to search for the
couple. Their pickup truck was spotted near the cave. Three members of
the Narrows Grotto of the NSS were called in to help search. The grotto
members found the couple on Tuesday 19 August 1975. It took several
hours to lead the weakened couple out of the cave.
The Mongolds had been in the cave for either 10 or 13 days (their
account changed). They were both near starvation. According to the
examining doctor, Robert Mongold had lost 21 pounds and was within
or 3 days of death. Anita Mongold had lost 26 pounds and the doctor
doubted whether she could have lasted another day. The victims thought
they had been in the cave about 5 days when rescued.
Analysis: The Mongolds violated the basic rules of carrying three
sources of light and informing someone about their whereabouts. If their
truck had not been spotted they would almost certainly have perished.
Sources: Richards, Bill. (1975) "Story-Book Rescue in Cave?"
Washington Post. (22 August 1975), p.C1.
Anon. (1975) "Pair Near Death after 10 Days in Cave." Washington
Star. (21 August 1975), p.B1.
Dyas, Mike. (1975) 'Spelunkers' Nearly Starve in Maryland Cave."
issue, p.15).
Alabama, Moates Cave (also known as Sand Cave
and Cave Hollow Cave)


********** Sunday, 17 August 1975
Bill Asherbranner (25) and three companions had lights to explore
Moates Cave but did not have any ropes. Asherbranner fell 50 feet and
landed in a pool of water 4 feet deep. His companions tried to rescue him
with a heavy vine, but Asherbranner, who has only one arm, did not
have the strength to hold onto the vine to be pulled out. Two of the men
then went for help. Asherbranner was hoisted to safety by the Flint
Rescue Squad after 6 p.m., about 4 hours after the fall.
Analysis: The group was clearly unprepared for the cave. Undoubtedly
the water reduced the shock of the fall. It is good the group gave up their
attempt to rescue their fallen member since they did not have the
experience nor equipment to handle it.

---------- Page 15 ----------
Source: Anon. (1975) "Man is Rescued from Cave Fall." The Decatur
Daily. (18 August 1975).
Texas, Indian Cave


********** Saturday, 23 August 1975
Indian Cave is entered through a 60-foot pit which drops into a room
45 feet in diameter. The pit is nearly vertical and has no loose rocks in or
near the immediate drop, although there are a number of rocks on the
floor.
Steve Gutting (22), Ed Gelsone (21), Greg Passmore (17), and April
Austin (23), all of the Alamo Grotto, as well as Paul Carey (19), a novice,
were using the cave for vertical practice. Around noon Carey climbed
out on one of the two ropes rigged in the pit. At 12:18 April Austin was a
few feet off the ground on the other rope when Carey accidently broke
off an exfoliation formation when he tried using it for a foot hold to get
over the lip of the pit. Carey shouted, "Rock!" Gutting and Gelsone ran
for cover but were struck with rock fragments.
Ms. Austin was on the rope and was unable to move to safety. After
the rockfall she was in a sitting position hanging from her Jumar safety.
It was quickly determined that she was seriously injured and could have
a broken neck. Gutting called to the surface for a rescue. The cavers
decided that they needed to get Ms. Austin off the rope as soon as
possible so Gelsone lifted and supported her while Gutting unclipped her
Jumars and they lowered her to the floor. She was still unconscious but
had a pulse and was breathing without difficulty. She had a laceration on
her skull but it was not bleeding. They treated her for shock and called
to the surface for more clothing to cover the victim. After 5 minutes Ms.
Austin regained consciousness. She complained of general pain all over,
especially in her head.
On the surface, Passmore had gone for help but was unable to start
Gutting's car, so he ran to the nearest house and called Chuck Stuehm,
who in turn contacted two area cavers and Terry Jones, an EMT for the
city of San Antonio.
At 12:40 San Antonio firemen arrived at the cave. Terry Jones arrived
3 minutes later. The cavers on the surface took all necessary steps to
prevent anything else from falling into the pit. At 1:15 Jones descended
into the cave, examined Ms. Austin and described her condition and vital
signs to the doctor on the surface. Steve Gutting helped Jones
immobilize the victim's neck with a neck collar and apply a dressing to
her head injury. A caver came halfway down the pit to a ledge to help in
lowering and raising the Stoke's litter. By 2:15 Ms. Austin was on the
surface and in the care of the doctors. Her injuries included a fractured
skull, a compacted vertebra in her neck, and minor cuts and bruises. She
was expected to recover fully.
Analysis: "This accident was indeed freak as this is not a cave of much
activity and the force applied to the exfoliated formation (which could
not be detected until it broke loose) was much less than the force applied
when we rappelled using this portion of the wall to spring from. If we
had not rigged two ropes April would have been in a different position
enabling her to get out of the way of the falling rock.
"One distinct fact that this accident has made even more evident is the
poor quality hard hats that most cavers wear as head gear. They are for
the most part no more than light carriers. Even though the helmet April
was wearing failed, it did prevent her from further injury. The impact of
the falling formation on April's helmet caused the helmet to be
compressed down to the top of her head, and at the same time the poorly
constructed helmet liner split apart, letting the helmet come in direct
contact with her head. The helmet was of the plastic type construction
with a label stating that it passed the ANSI Z89.1 and Z89.2 safety
requirements.
"It is very evident that cavers in this area have been depending on
helmets of very poor safety standards. The helmet may stop a falling
object, but the liners will probably pop apart, leaving you with no
protection at all. We firmly believe that this is one area in which cavers
should spend some extra money and purchase a helmet that meets the
standards of the Mountain Safety Research Company."
Source: Anon. (1975) "Accident Report." The Texas Caver. Vol. 20,
No. 12, 5.186-187.
West Virginia, Snedegar-Crookshank Cave


********** Saturday, 30 August 1975
Five people from Pennsylvania including three men, Bill Kent, Bob
Andrews and Jay Sidman, and two boys, Scott McIntosh and Bruce
Widdows, descended the Crookshank Pit. It is a 100-foot vertical
waterfall entrance to the Snedegar-Crookshank System. They planned
to make the connection between the two sections of the cave and leave
by the Saltpeter Miners Entrance although no one in the party had made
the connection before. Andrews and Sidman became soaked in the Rick's
Siphon passage and ascended the rope out of the cave. Kent and the boys
were unable to find the connection and returned to the pit. The waterfall
had increased in size because of rain on the surface. Kent was able to
climb out through the waterfall but decided the ascent was too difficult
for the boys. Andrews left to find someone who could descend the pit and
lead the boys out another entrance.
Meanwhile five cavers from the Met Grotto had entered by the
saltpeter entrance and by chance had discovered the boys at the bottom
of the Crookshank Entrance. Both boys were suffering from the initial
stages of hypothermia and one boy was unable to move his fingers
because of the cold. Knowing that any attempt to remove the boys by
the pit would involve a wait of at least one hour, it was decided to take
them out through the connection to Snedegar's. This involved carrying
them through some of the deep pools to prevent further loss of body
heat. The exit was completed without major difficulty.

---------- Page 16 ----------
Analysis: "The entire party was under-experienced and under-equipped
for this cave. The adult leaders had been told this in at least three
separate discussions with different individuals before they made their
attempt. In one of these discussions they stated that they 'didn't have
time' to become involved with a regular grotto.
The party was unfamiliar with such basic terms as belay and carabiner
(though they had some). When told that a belay was a safety rope they
said they would tie a safety around their chest.
No safety was used. The party had only one rope.
No padding was used under the rope at the edge of the pit.
No method of communication had been worked out between top and
bottom. The boys had no idea of what was happening.
No one in the party had made the connection to Snedegar's before.
No one in the party was familiar with the conditions and effects of
exposure. After the boys were out of the cave, some two hours after we
found them, we found the adults waiting for someone experienced to
show up. Both boys could have been dead by this time.
Failing to find an experienced person, no attempt had been made to
alert the county authorities.
The boys were ill equipped for even regular caving; only one had a
headlamp, the other a large six-volt flashlight.
It is only through the most fortuitous of circumstances that a fatal
accident was avoided. Any one of the errors made could have been
disastrous." (Greene)
Sources: Greene, Barry. (1975) "Rescue at Crookshank Cave." Met
Grotto News. Vol. 25, No. 4, pp.33-34.
Dyas, Mike. (1975) "Three More West Virginia Cave Rescues
Chronicled." D.C. Speleograph. December issue, p.12.
Florida, Peacock Sough


********** Saturday, 30 August 1975
When three cave divers reached their turnaround point in Peacock
Slough, William Hurst (34) signaled for the other two to leave the cave.
Hurst then continued to explore a side tunnel; however, he left a 25-foot
gap between a safety line in the tunnel and the line leading out of the
cave. Evidently when he returned he could not find the line going to the
entrance. His body was recovered early Sunday morning some 10 hours
after he drowned.
Analysis: Hurst had about a year and a half of cave diving experience yet
he ignored two fundamental rules: never cave dive alone and never leave
the safety line. In caving or cave diving, confidence not tempered with
caution will often lead to the neglect of essential safety practices, and
could result in injury or death.
This was the fifth cave diving fatality in Peacock Slough during 1975;
however, we have no information about the other accidents.
Source: Corbin, Will. (1975) "Pollution Director Hurst Drowns in Diving
Accident." Gainesville Sun, 1 September 1975.
Alabama, Tumbling Rock Cave


********** Sunday, 7 September 1975
Don Davison, Jr., Cheryl Jones, David Green, and Glenn Cook
entered Tumbling Rock at 1:20 p.m. in order to attempt to reach the top
of Topless Pit which is about 3800 feet into the cave. Davison and Jones,
both experienced vertical cavers, spent several previous trips
attempting to aid climb to the top of the dome in hopes of finding new
leads. They ascended fixed ropes to their highest belay position, the
Crow's Nest, 270 feet above the floor. Meanwhile the others began
ferrying previously stockpiled support gear out of the cave. Davison
ascended to the 360-foot level and then, belayed by Cheryl Jones,
climbed antoher 25 feet. Because of rotten rock and a waterfall, they quit
for the day. Davison descended to a ledge 174 feet above the floor,
traversed along the ledge using a trolley line, and then descended to the
134-foot ledge. Cheryl Jones prepared to descend from the 174-foot
ledge. The rappel line from that ledge was attached with a carabiner to a
carabiner chock and then backed to a hexcentric nut in a crack. The
carabiner chock was solid against a downward pull, but not against an
upward pull.
At about 10 p.m. as Cheryl Jones rappelled below the lip of the
174-foot ledge, the carabiner chock and its backup pulled out. She fell
about 40 feet. In the process the rope flipped her upside down, and she
banged into the wall. Her fall was arrested by her rack which was bent
from the shock after the slack came out of the rope. She hung inverted in
the waterfall about 130 feet above the floor. She was unconscious and
blood streamed from her head lacerations. Her Fibre-Metal helmet hung
by the cord to her Wheat Lamp. Cheryl Jones regained consciousness,
and although severely disoriented and dazed, was able to right herself
and apply direct pressure to her scalp wound.
Davison was on the 134-foot ledge about 40 feet from the victim. He
constructed a 2-to-1 pulley system and was able to pull her about 20 feet
and away from the waterfall. She was still somewhat confused but had
repositioned her helmet discovering that the lamp lens was fractured.
Her neck hurt badly, and she suffered a debilitating injury to her left
elbow. Her condition stabilized somewhat. Davison drove two bolts in
order to get to Cheryl. After some difficulty when it was necessary to
cut the rope she was suspended from, Davison was able to get her to the
134-foot ledge.
Green then returned to the pit and was told to summon the Huntsville
Cave, Pit and Cliff Rescue Unit. He was to bring a first-aid kit, 400 feet
of Bluewater rope, blankets, and a Stokes litter. The call was received at
12:45 a.m. Monday by W. W. Varnedoe, Jr., chief of the team. Eleven
men reached the cave which is about 60 miles from Huntsville by 2:35
a.m. and an hour later they were at the dome.
Meanwhile Davison had treated the injured woman with first-aid,
given her a wool sweater, and placed a plastic garbage bag over her legs.

---------- Page 17 ----------
Davison descended to the floor, changed carbide, and then carried food
back up to the victim. A carbide lamp was used to provide warmth.
When the rescue team arrived, the victim was lowered to the floor and
placed in a Stokes litter. The rescue party performed efficiently and got
the victim to the entrance by 7 a.m., 9 hours after the accident.
Analysis: "1.) The exact circumstances involved in the failure of the
rappel anchor are not known since the route to Gargoyle Ledge has not
been reclimbed at this time. 2.) The Davison System seat maintained its
position despite the force at the inverted termination of the fall. 3.) The
chin strap was forcefully separated from the helmet button, as was the
suspension at that point, causing Cheryl's helmet to fall from her head.
On the 134-foot ledge, the chin strap, button, and suspension were
reunited since no damage had occurred to any of the parts. These facts
cause questions to be raised concerning the use of Fibre-metal
suspensions and chin straps. 4.) It was pure chance that all the necessary
hardware was available for me to use [for the rescue]. 5.) The Stokes
litter should have an ensolite pad on the bottom to protect the blankets
from water and the victim from heat loss when the litter is set on the
ground. 6.) Air splints and cervical collars would be valuable additions to
the first aid kit. 7.) The dri-suit and plastic bags enabled the victim to
maintain body temperature and eliminated exposure as a complicating
condition." (Davison)
"The use of this rappel anchor, while it might have been sound under
most circumstances, become unsound when coupled with a fatigued and,
hence, less alert caver. Anchors should be chosen with the view that
they may not always be treated with due caution.' (Varnedoe)
Sources: Davison, Don, Jr. and Cheryl Jones. (1975) "Accident in
Tumbling Rock." The Huntsville Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 16, No. 6,
pp.56-59.
Varnedoe, W. W. Jr. (1975) "Cave, Pit and Cliff Rescue Unit Accident
Report." The Huntsville Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 16, No. 6, .54-56.
West Virginia, Beacon Cave


********** Saturday, 13 September 1975
At about 2 p.m. four Bluefield College students, Peter Dikternik,
Larry Yates (20), Perry Coffey (18) and Jerry Johnson (18) entered
Beacon Cave. Dikternik had trouble negotiating the tight spots so he left
to wait for the others who promised to be out by 5 p.m. Shortly
afterward Yates took a tumble and smashed his flashlight. The other
flashlights in the group also began to peter out.
Saturday evening Dikternik reported his friends overdue. The
Bluefield Rescue Squad and nine members of the VPI Grotto
participated in the search. The cavers were not found that night, and
without food or water they huddled together and prayed. At dawn the
three noted a beam of light coming thru the bulldozed Hayne's Entrance.
Coffey, who is tall but slim, was able to squeeze through the entrance,
but his companions were too large. Coffey located the searchers who
passed donuts and water to the trapped students. Other rescuers then
led the two out the Beacon Entrance about 23 hours after they had
entered.
Analysis: The students were inexperienced and did not have adequate
light, food, or other caving gear.
Sources: Report by Lor M. Windle.
Dyas, Mike. (1975) "Three 'Speleo-Boppers' Lost Overnight in West
Virginia Cave." D.C. Speleograph. November issue, .19.
Gay, Lance. (1975) "Lost Explorer Finds Cave No Place for Him."
Washington Star. 15 Sept. 1975, p.B1 (reprinted in Baltimore Grotto
News, Vol. XV, No. 2, Oct. 1975).
Anon. (1975) "Three College Students Rescued." Wheeling Intelli-
gencer. 15 Sept. 1975 (reprinted in Karst Caver, Vol. 9, No. 3, p.73).
Alabama, Schimmel Pit


********** Sunday, 21 September 1975
One Sunday afternoon Bert Grainger (13) and several friends decided
to enter Schimmel Pit which consists of a small diameter 30-foot drop to
a
talus slope leading down about 12 feet to another 15-foot pit. Grainger
began to descend the first drop hand-over-hand on a small diameter
rope. He was about half way down when the rope broke and he fell. His
only injury was a cut lip.
One youth ran for help and notified the police who in turn contacted
the Madison County Rescue Squad who called the Cave, Pit and Cliff
Rescue Unit. Before the rescue group arrived one of Grainger's
companions, a sixteen-year-old girl, chopped down a small tree and
inserted it into the pit. Grainger then climbed out and was taken to a
hospital.
Analysis: The children were clearly unfamiliar with safe caving
techniques. The girl showed great ingenuity in improvising a method for
the boy to escape, but such ingenuity could easily have led to a second
fall.
Source: Report by Darwin Moss.
Kentucky, Simpson's Cave


********** Tuesday, 9 October 1975
Johnny Wilson (12) had been to Simpson's Cave two or three times
before, but his friend, Scott Trotter (11), had not. They entered the cave
after school Tuesday using a lantern for light. When it started flickering
they began to run to get out. The two boys fell over a ledge and Trotter
injured his nose and Wilson bruised his knee. They were found about
midnight by the Somerset-Pulaski County Rescue Squad and Pulaski
County Sheriff's officers.

---------- Page 18 ----------
Analysis: Clearly the boys did not have adequate light nor experience for
cave exploration.
Source: Mardia, Bill. Somerset (Kentucky) Commonwealth-Journal
9 Oct. 1975 (reprinted in part in COG Squeaks, Vol. 18, No. 10,
October 1975).
West Virginia, Nutt Cave


********** Saturday, 8 November 1975
Around noon, a group of eight young people from a Romney, West
Virginia school for the deaf entered Nutt Cave equipped with flashlights
and Butterfly carbide lamps. In the stream passage, they encountered
another party, whom they followed through the breakdown maze to the
formation rooms in the rear of the cave. Apparently because of the deaf
people's handicap in communicating, they were left behind when the
other group departed, and were unable to find their way back through
the breakdown.
The group pooled their limited number of lights for the use of three of
their members. As five students remained, the three were eventually
able to get out of the cave-but not until 10 a.m. Sunday. The cave is
probably less than 1000 feet in its entirety.
The Franklin Volunteer Fire Department/Rescue Squad notified NSS
member Dave Hubbs who was able to find the youths within 15 minutes
of entering the cave. The people were unharmed but chilled and
frightened and did not realize they had been in the cave over 24 hours.
Analysis: The students were inexperienced and lacked a capable leader.
Undoubtedly the deaf students had considerable difficulty communicat-
ing among themselves and organizing a concerted search effort. The
group which led them to the back of the cave and then left them when
they could not keep up is to be condemned.
Source: Dyas, Mike. (1975) "Three More West Virginia Cave Rescues
Chronicled." D.C. Speleograph, Dec. issue, p.12-13.
West Virginia, Schoolhouse Cave


********** Saturday, 29 November 1975
Members of the Boston Grotto had explored Schoolhouse Cave the
previous day but had left their ropes in place. A group of five cavers
entered at 5:30 a.m. to rerig the cave. Around 12:30 p.m. Warren Heller
had completed Leo's Climb near the Judgement Seat and had gotten off
rope when the ledge he was standing on gave way. He immediately
called, "Rock!" and was able to arrest his sliding fall in about 10 feet. The
three cavers below Heller at the top of a 100-foot drop were able to
dodge the rock. Carl Traina at the bottom of the pit was unable to
completely get out of the way of the rocks. A 75-pound, rectangular rock
struck him a glancing blow just below the small of the back. The victim
was fully conscious, coherent, and not bleeding externally but in
considerable pain.
A member of a second party which had just entered the cave was sent
for help. Twenty-five people, mainly from the Boston and Philadelphia
Grottos and the Potomac Speleological Club, were able to get the victim
out by 7:30 p.m. This involved raising him in a Stokes litter up three
pitches. Traina suffered fractures of the lower sternum and hip ball joint
and was expected to be hospitalized about one month.
Analysis: Heller misjudged the condition of the ledge. Possibly more
thought about the danger of rock falls by those at both the top and
bottom of the pit could have prevented this accident. The rescue was
very efficient because of the large number of highly qualified cavers in
the area at the time.
Sources: Cullen, James J. (1976) "Accident in Schoolhouse Cave, West
Virginia." NSS News. Vol. 34, No. 2, p.19.
Ibberson, Dale (1975) "Schoolhouse Rescue, Pendleton Co., W.Va."
York Grotto Newsletter. Vol. 13, p. 44.
Dyas, Mike. (1976) "Rescue at Schoolhouse Cave." D.C. Speleograph.
January issue, p.17.
Florida, Promis Springs


********** Sunday, 30 November 1975
Lewis Holtzendorff (30) and Courtland Smith Jr. were scuba diving to
a depth of almost 225 feet in the Promis Springs cave. They were on
their way to the surface following the experimental dive when at about
40 feet from the top, Holtzendorff blacked out and fell on Smith. Smith
began to buddy-breathe with his diving partner, but also felt he too
might be beginning to black out. He swam to the surface and got another
tank of compressed air. Holtzendorff could not be resuscitated with the
second tank. He died about 6 a.m. while completing decompression.
Analysis: The editor does not know what about the dive was
experimental and how this may have influenced the outcome of the
accident. Holtzendorff was considered a highly qualified cave diver who
had made significant discoveries in numerous Florida caves.
Sources: Vail, Becky (1975) "Valdostan Dies Diving in Cave." The
Valdosta Daily Times. 1 December 1975.
DeLoach, Paul (1976) "Lewis Holtzendorff." Cave Diving Section
Newsletter. Winter issue, pp.57-58.
Anon. (1976) "Lewis Holtzendorff, NSS 14831." NSS News. Vol. 34,
No. 5, p.76.

---------- Page 19 ----------
Texas, Pumkin Cave
A Laredo Speleological Society member fell 50 feet to his death in the
entrance pit of Pumkin Cave. The iron stake to which his rope was tied
broke off as he began descending into the pit.
Analysis: Although this information is very sketchy, the accident was
attributed to carelessness, unnecessary haste, and not using a belay. If
the tie-off point is at all questionable, the rope should be tied to 2 or
more independent points.
Source: Morris, Neal. (1975) "TSA BOG." The Texas Caver. Vol. 20,
No. 10, pp. 153-155.
West Virginia, Bowden Cave
Three novices from Columbus, Ohio, Jon and Ronnie Lucio and Jeff
Thompson, intended to traverse from the main entrance of Bowden Cave
to the upper entrance No. 3. The latter is a small opening above a
fissure, reached by a rather long crawl from the cave's complex
upstream area. They tried two passages unsuccessfully but in the
process became soaking wet from stomach crawls in mud. Realizing they
were near exhaustion to the point of being clumsy, they had no choice
but to rest. Since the floor was quite damp, they stood from about 6 p.m.
to 6 a.m. rather than risk losing body heat into the floor. In the morning
they started exploring again, hoping that the sun would make the
entrance easier to find. The group was found about 50 feet from entrance
No. 3 by members of the Monongahela Grotto.
Analysis: The rescue had been delayed by a register note left by the lost
group indicating their plan to exit by the main entrance; hence, the
entrance No. 3 area was the last to be searched.
The lost group was systematically checking out the passages and had
only two more to check when they were found. They fully realized the
dangers of hypothermia and decided to rest and conserve energy after
they recognized the first signs of hypothermia. It is not clear whether
standing up all night is a good way to conserve body heat.
Sources: Report by Jon and Ronnie Lucio and Jeff Thompson.
Dyas, Mike. (1975) "Three More West Virginia Cave Rescues
Chronicled." D.C. Speleograph, Dec. issue, pp. 12-13.
San Luis Potosi, Mexico, La Hoya de las Conchas
Julia James, Neil Montgomery, Tracy and Shelia Johnson, and Bill
Stone had gone down ten drops to a depth of 175 meters in la Hoya de las
Conchas. As Sheila Johnson was making a difficult traverse, a foothold
broke. She flipped twice in the air and landed in a shallow pool 5 meters
below. She received facial injuries, and rescue operations were begun
immediately. In 51/2 hours the group pulled her up all the drops using a
haul line, a belay line, and a separate climbing line for assistance.
Analysis: "There is no question that the pitch Sheila fell on, though
climbable, should have had a handline. The team's shortage of rope
(which ultimately stopped further exploration at -500m) was a thin
excuse. Everyone's climbing ability must be considered, not just that of
the best climber, who is usually in the lead deciding whether to rig or
not. The cave's depth and wetness, and the team's shortage of personnel
all counselled prudence. Few accidents have yet occurred in American
deep caves, but it is much to their credit that the rescue team got Sheila
out so quickly-and no small part of this credit goes to the Australian
cavers. Also of note is the fact that Sheila's helmet, a construction type
with elastic chin strap, flew off her head in mid-fall. Under the
centrifugal force of a fall the chin strap will stretch, and such a helmet
will leave the head. Sheila was lucky." (Sprouse)
Source: Sprouse, Peter (1976) "Mexico." NSS News. Vol. 34, No. 3,
pp.51-52.
Indiana, Buckner Cave
Indiana University biology professor David Dilcher (39), his wife
Katherine (38), their son and daughter, Peter (9) and Ann (7) and Mark
Davis (9) became lost while exploring Buckner Cave. They had never
been in the cave before and became lost while trying to follow a map of
the cave. Mark Davis's mother notified the police when her son and the
Dilchers did not return Thursday evening. Rescuers found the group
Friday about 11 hours after they had entered. They were waiting for
rescuers about half way around a commonly travelled loop.
Analysis: The group attempted to rely on a map rather than their power
of observation.
Source: Newspaper clipping.
Indiana, unidentified cave
1975(?)
Roger Hitterman (18), Perry Haeberlein (17) and Robert Lavey (17)
entered a cave near Ramsey around 4:30 p.m. About 21/2 hours later as
they were leaving, a rock slide started at the entrance. Hitterman was
able to get out before the main slide trapped his two companions in the
entrance. He was unable to move the large rocks and therefore sought
assistance. The State Police, Ohio Valley Rescue officials, the Ramsey
Volunteer Fire Department, Harrison County sheriff's deputies and

---------- Page 20 ----------
numerous local residents responded. By 10 p.m. rescue workers had
pierced the wall and the boys crawled to safety unharmed.
Analysis: Police were unable to confirm whether Hitterman may have
started the slide by grabbing loose rocks. In any event not enough care
was taken in an unsafe area.
Source: Jeffersonville (Indiana) Evening News clipping.
If you ever get trapped in a flooded cave, you have the
rest of your life to get out.
Reportedly overheard at
1974 NSS Convention
Summary
This issue of American Caving Accidents contains the reports of 42
incidents involving 86 persons.
The summary tables have been divided into two parts. The first part
gives statistics on the type of cave accidents. For each accident report
there is one entry under situation, month, and day of the week.
Classification of accidents by cause and contributory cause is open to a
lot of subjective interpretation of the individual reports since often an
accident occurred only after a combination of events had taken place.
The second part of the summary tables deals with the accident
victims. In each category, there is one entry for each victim.
Suggestions for improvement or modification of the summary or any
part of this report are welcome and should be addressed to the National
Speleological Society, Safety and Techniques Committee, Cave Avenue,
Huntsville, Alabama 35810.
ACCIDENTS
1967-1975
Situation
General
Vertical
Diving
Immediate Cause
Fall
Falling rock or object
Failure of rappel or prusik
Stumble
Exposure and/or exhaustion
Burns
Asphyxiation
Illness
Drowning
Animal attacks

---------- Page 21 ----------
1967-1975 -
Contributory Causes
Climbing unroped
Caving alone
Exceeding avilities (inexperience)
Inadequate equipment
Worn equipment
Bad weather (including flooding)
Exposure and/or exhaustion
Loosing way
Light failure
Party too large
Party separated
Getting stuck
Hurry
Poor judgement
Month
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Unknown
Day of Week
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Unknown
ACCIDENT VICTIMS
Sex
Male
Female
Unknown
1967-1975 - 1975
Age of Individuals
"Boys"
Under 15
15-20
"Young or college age"
21-25
26-30
31-35
Over 35
Unknown
Affiliation with Caving Group
Unaffiliated
Member of caving group
Unknown
Estimate of Experience
None or little
Moderate
Experienced
Unknown

---------- Page 22 ----------
Appendix
Graphical Presentation of the Cave Accident Statistics
These graphs are based on the nine issues of ACA between 1967 and
1975. Accidents for which we did not have certain data were omitted in
the compilation of that data. For example, if it was known that an
accident occurred in April but the date or the day of the week was not
known, then that accident is used in the compilation of accidents by
month but not in the compilation of data by day of the week.
General
Vertical
Diving
Year of ACA
Graph 1. The number of cave accidents by situation. The rise in
the number of accidents may be an artifact of the reporting
efficiency. As stated previously, there were many diving accidents
which were not reported in ACA. Roughly 40 to 45 percent of the
non-cave diving accidents were while vertical caving.

---------- Page 23 ----------
average
Graph 2. Cave accidents by month of the year. The cave accident
rate is slightly lower than average in summer and slightly higher
in fall.
average
Graph 3. Cave accidents by day of the
week (1). Cave rescue teams should note
that 73% of the cave accidents happen on
weekends.

---------- Page 24 ----------
Monday thru Friday
Sunday
Saturday
Year of ACA
Graph 4. Cave accidents by day of the week (2). The high incidence
of weekend cave accidents has held for all but one year since the
Safety and Techniques Committee began publishing ACA.
Graph 5. Immediate causes of caving accidents. Falls are by far the
major cause of cave accidents.

---------- Page 25 ----------
Graph 6. Contributory causes of caving accidents. Most accidents
happen because of inexperience.
Women
Men
Year of ACA
Graph 7. Percentage of victims by sex. Men have 88% of the
caving accidents.

---------- Page 26 ----------
over 35
TT
26-35
21-25
15-20
or
college
age
under
Year of ACA
Graph 8. Age of cave accident victims. Two thirds of all cave
accident victims are between the ages of 15 and 25.
NATIONAL SPELEOLOGICAL SOCIETY LIBRARY
1 CAVE AVENUE
HUNTSVILLE, ALA. 35810
